1. The Future Buddha as a Wise Judge:- A woman, carrying her child, went to the future Buddha's
tank to wash. And having first bathed the child, she put on her upper garment and descended into
the water to bathe herself. Then a Yakshini, seeing the child, had a craving to eat it. And taking
the form of a woman, she drew near, and asked the mother, "Friend, this is a very pretty child. Is
it one of yours?" And when she was told it was, she asked if she might nurse it. And this being
allowed, she nursed it a little, and then carried it off. But when the mother saw this, she ran
after her, and cried out, "Where are you taking my child to?" and caught hold of her. The Yakshini
boldly said, "Where did you get the child from? It is mine!" And so quarreling, they passed the
door of the future Buddha's Judgment Hall. He heard the noise, sent for them, inquired into the
matter, and asked them whether they would abide by his decision. And they agreed. Then he had a
line drawn on the ground; and told the Yakshini to take hold of the child's arms, and the mother to
take hold of its legs; and said, "The child shall be hers who drags him over the line." But as soon
as they pulled at him, the mother, seeing how he suffered, grieved as if her heart would break. And
letting him go, she stood there weeping. Then the future Buddha asked the bystanders, "Whose hearts
are tender to babes? Those who have borne children, or those who have not?" And they answered, "Oh
sire! The hearts of mothers are tender." Then he said, "Who, think you, is the mother? She who has
the child in her arms, or she who has let go?" And they answered, "She who has let go is the
mother." And he said, "Then do you all think that the other was the thief?" And they answered,
"Sire! We cannot tell." And he said, "Verily, this is a Yakshini, who took the child to eat it."
And he replied, "Because her eyes winked not, and were red, and she knew no fear, and had no pity,
I knew it." And so saying, he demanded of the thief, "Who are you?" And she said, "Lord! I am a
Yakshini." And he asked, "Why did you take away this child?" And she said, "I thought to eat him,
Oh my Lord!" And he rebuked her, saying, "Oh foolish woman! For your former sins you have been born
a Yakshini, and now do you still sin!" And he laid a vow upon her to keep the Five Commandments,
and let her go. But the mother of the child exalted the future Buddha, and said, "Oh my Lord! Oh
great physician! May your life be long!" And she went away, with her babe clasped to her bosom.


2. The Mosquito and the Carpenter:- Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta gained his livelihood as a trader. In these days in a border village in Kasi there dwelt
a number of carpenters. And it chanced that one of them, a bald gray-haired man, was planing away
at some wood with his head glistening like a copper bowl, when a mosquito settled on his scalp and
stung him with its dart like sting. Said the carpenter to his son, who was seated hard by, "My boy,
there's a mosquito stinging me on the head. Do drive it away." "Hold still then father," said the
son. "One blow will settle it." (At that very time the Bodhisatta had reached that village in the
way of trade, and was sitting in the carpenter's shop.) "Rid me of it!" cried the father. "All
right, father," answered the son, who was behind the old man's back, and, raising a sharp ax on
high with intent to kill only the mosquito, he cleft his father's head in two. So the old man fell
dead on the spot. Thought the Bodhisatta, who had been an eye witness of the whole scene, "Better
than such a friend is an enemy with sense, whom fear of men's vengeance will deter from killing a
man." And he recited these lines: Sense-lacking friends are worse than foes with sense; Witness the
son that sought the gnat to slay, But cleft, poor fool, his father's skull in two. So saying, the
Bodhisatta rose up and departed, passing away in after days to fare according to his deserts. And
as for the carpenter, his body was burned by his kinsfolk.


3. The Golden Mallard:- Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born a Brahmin, and growing up was married to a bride of his own rank, who bore him three
daughters named Nanda, Nanda-vati, and Sundari-nanda. The Bodhisatta dying, they were taken in by
neighbors and friends, whilst he was born again into the world as a golden mallard endowed with
consciousness of its former existences. Growing up, the bird viewed its own magnificent size and
golden plumage, and remembered that previously it had been a human being. Discovering that his wife
and daughters were living on the charity of others, the mallard bethought him of his plumage like
hammered and beaten gold and how by giving them a golden feather at a time he could enable his wife
and daughters to live in comfort. So away he flew to where they dwelt and alighted on the top of
the central beam of the roof. Seeing the Bodhisatta, the wife and girls asked where he had come
from; and he told them that he was their father who had died and been born a golden mallard, and
that he had come to visit them and put an end to their miserable necessity of working for hire.
"You shall have my feathers," said he, "one by one, and they will sell for enough to keep you all
in ease and comfort." So saying, he gave them one of his feathers and departed. And from time to
time he returned to give them another feather, and with the proceeds of their sale these Brahmin
women grew prosperous and quite well to do. But one day the mother said to her daughters, "There's
no trusting animals, my children. Who's to say your father might not go away one of these days and
never come back again? Let us use our time and pluck him clean next time he comes, so as to make
sure of all his feathers." Thinking this would pain him, the daughters refused. The mother in her
greed called the golden mallard to her one day when he came, and then took him with both hands and
plucked him. Now the Bodhisatta's feathers had this property that if they were plucked out against
his wish, they ceased to be golden and became like a crane's feathers. And now the poor bird,
though he stretched his wings, could not fly, and the woman flung him into a barrel and gave him
food there. As time went on his feathers grew again (though they were plain white ones now), and he
flew away to his own abode and never came back again.


4. The Tortoise That Loved His Home Too Much:- Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in
Benares, the Bodhisatta was born in a village as a potter's son. He plied the potter's trade, and
had a wife and family to support. At that time there lay a great natural lake close by the great
river of Benares. When there was much water, river and lake were one; but when the water was low,
they were apart. Now fish and tortoises know by instinct when the year will be rainy and when there
will be a drought. So at the time of our story the fish and tortoises which lived in that lake knew
there would be a drought; and when the two were one water, they swam out of the lake into the
river. But there was one tortoise that would not go into the river, because, said he, "here I was
born, and here I have grown up, and here is my parents' home. Leave it I cannot!" Then in the hot
season the water all dried up. He dug a hole and buried himself, just in the place where the
Bodhisatta was used to come for clay. There the Bodhisatta came to get some clay. With a big spade
he dug down, until he cracked the tortoise's shell, turning him out on the ground as though he were
a large piece of clay. In his agony the creature thought, "Here I am, dying, all because I was too
fond of my home to leave it!" And in the words of these following verses, he made his moan: Here
was I born, and here I lived; my refuge was the clay; And now the clay has played me false in a
most grievous way; Thee, thee I call, oh Bhaggava; hear what I have to say! Go where thou canst
find happiness, where'er the place may be; Forest or village, there the wise both home and
birthplace see; Go where there's life; nor stay at home for death to master thee. So he went on and
on, talking to the Bodhisatta, until he died. The Bodhisatta picked him up, and collecting all the
villagers addressed them thus: "Look at this tortoise. When the other fish and tortoises went into
the great river, he was too fond of home to go with them, and buried himself in the place where I
get my clay. Then as I was digging for clay, I broke his shell with my big spade, and turned him
out on the ground in the belief that he was a large lump of clay. Then he called to mind what he
had done, lamented his fate in two verses of poetry, and expired. So you see he came to his end
because he was too fond of his home. Take care not to be like this tortoise. Don't say to
yourselves, 'I have sight, I have hearing, I have smell, I have taste, I have touch, I have a son,
I have a daughter, I have numbers of men and maids for my service, I have precious gold.' Do not
cleave to these things with craving and desire. Each being passes through three stages of
existence." Thus did he exhort the crowd with all a Buddha's skill. The discourse was bruited
abroad all over India, and for full seven thousand years it was remembered. All the crowd abode by
his exhortation, and gave alms, and did good until at last they went to swell the hosts of heaven.


5. How a Parrot Told Tales of His Mistress and Had His Neck Wrung:- Once upon a time, when
Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta came into the world as a young parrot. His name was
Radha, and his youngest brother was named Potthapada. While they were yet quite young, both of them
were caught by a fowler and handed over to a Brahmin in Benares. The Brahmin cared for them as if
they were his children. But the Brahmin's wife was a wicked woman. There was no watching her. The
husband had to go away on business, and addressed his young parrots thus: "Little dears, I am going
away on business. Keep watch on your mother in season and out of season. Observe whether or not any
man visits her." So off he went, leaving his wife in charge of the young parrots. As soon as he was
gone, the woman began to do wrong. Night and day the visitors came and went. There was no end to
them. Potthapada, observing this, said to Radha, "Our master gave this woman into our charge, and
here she is doing wickedness. I will speak to her." "Don't," said Radha. But the other would not
listen. "Mother," said he, "why do you commit sin?" How she longed to kill him! But making as
though she would fondle him, she called him to her. "Little one, you are my son! I will never do it
again! Here, then the dear!" So he came out. Then she seized him, crying, "What! You preach to me!
You don't know your measure!" And she wrung his neck, and threw him into the oven. The Brahmin
returned. When he had rested, he asked the Bodhisatta, "Well, my dear, what about your mother? Does
she do wrong, or no?" And as he asked the question, he repeated the first couplet: I come, my son,
the journey done, and now I am at home again," Come tell me, is your mother true? Does she make
love to other men? Radha answered, "Father dear, the wise speak not of things which do not conduce
to blessing, whether they have happened or not." And he explained this by repeating the second
couplet: For what he said he now lies dead, burnt up beneath the ashes there. It is not well the
truth to tell, lest Potthapada's fate I share. Thus did the Bodhisatta hold forth to the Brahmin.
And he went on, "This is no place for me to live in either." Then bidding the Brahmin farewell, he
flew away into the woods.


6. The Monkey's Heart:- Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to life at the foot of the Himalayas as a monkey. He grew strong and sturdy, big of frame,
well to do, and lived by a curve of the river Ganges in a forest haunt. Now at that time there was
a crocodile dwelling in the Ganges. The crocodile's mate saw the great frame of the monkey, and she
conceived a longing to eat his heart. So she said to her lord, "Sir, I desire to eat the heart of
that great king of the monkeys!" "Good wife," said the crocodile, "I live in the water and he lives
on dry land. How can we catch him?" "By hook or by crook," she replied, "he must be caught. If I
don't get him, I shall die." "All right," answered the crocodile, consoling her, "don't trouble
yourself. I have a plan. I will give you his heart to eat." So when the Bodhisatta was sitting on
the bank of the Ganges, after taking a drink of water, the crocodile drew near, and said, "Sir
Monkey, why do you live on bad fruits in this old familiar place? On the other side of the Ganges
there is no end to the mango trees, and labuja trees, with fruit sweet as honey! Is it not better
to cross over and have all kinds of wild fruit to eat?" "Lord Crocodile," the monkey answered. "The
Ganges is deep and wide. How shall I get across?" "If you want to go, I will let you sit upon my
back, and carry you over." The monkey trusted him, and agreed. "Come here, then," said the
crocodile. "Up on my back with you!" and up the monkey climbed. But when the crocodile had swum a
little way, he plunged the monkey under the water. "Good friend, you are letting me sink!" cried
the monkey. "What is that for?" The crocodile said, "You think I am carrying you out of pure good
nature? Not a bit of it! My wife has a longing for your heart, and I want to give it to her to
eat.!" "Friend," said the monkey, "it is nice of you to tell me. Why, if our heart were inside us,
when we go jumping among the tree tops it would be all knocked to pieces!" "Well, where do you keep
it?" asked the crocodile. The Bodhisatta pointed out a fig tree, with clusters of ripe fruit,
standing not far off. "See," said he, "there are our hearts hanging on yonder fig tree." "If you
will show me your heart," said the crocodile, "then I won't kill you." "Take me to the tree, then,
and I will point it out to you." The crocodile brought him to the place. The monkey leapt off his
back, and, climbing up the fig tree, sat upon it. "Oh silly crocodile!" said he. "You thought that
there were creatures that kept their hearts in a treetop! You are a fool, and I have outwitted you!
You may keep your fruit to yourself. Your body is great, but you have no sense." And then to
explain this idea he uttered the following stanzas: Rose-apple, jack-fruit, mangoes, too, across
the water there I see; Enough of them, I want them not; my fig is good enough for me! Great is your
body, verily, but how much smaller is your wit! Now go your ways, Sir Crocodile, for I have had the
best of it. The crocodile, feeling as sad and miserable as if he had lost a thousand pieces of
money, went back sorrowing to the place where he lived.


7. The Talkative Tortoise:- The Jataka Tales Once on a time Brahmadatta was king of Benares, and
the Bodhisatta, being born to one of the king's court, grew up, and became the king's adviser in
all things human and divine. But this king was very talkative; and when he talked there was no
chance for any other to get in a word. And the Bodhisatta, wishing to put a stop to his much
talking, kept watching for an opportunity. Now there dwelt a tortoise in a certain pond in the
region of Himalaya. Two young wild geese, searching for food, struck up an acquaintance with him;
and by and by they grew close friends together. One day these two said to him: "Friend Tortoise, we
have a lovely home in Himalaya, on a plateau of Mount Cittakuta, in a cave of gold! Will you come
with us?" "Why," said he, "how can I get there?" "Oh, we will take you, if only you can keep your
mouth shut, and say not a word to anybody." "Yes, I can do that," says he. "Take me along!" So they
made the tortoise hold a stick between his teeth; and themselves taking hold so of the two ends,
they sprang up into the air. The village children saw this, and exclaimed: "There are two geese
carrying a tortoise by a stick!" (By this time the geese flying swiftly had arrived at the space
above the palace of the king, at Benares.) The Tortoise wanted to cry out: "Well, and if my friends
do carry me, what is that to you, you caitiffs?" And he let go the stick from between his teeth,
and falling into the open courtyard he split in two. What an uproar there was! "A tortoise has
fallen in the courtyard, and broken in two!" they cried. The king, with the Bodhisatta, and all his
court, came up to the place, and seeing the tortoise asked the Bodhisatta a question. "Wise Sir,
what made this creature fall?" "Now's my time!" thought he. "For a long while I have been wishing
to admonish the king, and I have gone about seeking my opportunity. No doubt the truth is this: The
tortoise and the geese became friendly; the geese must have meant to carry him to Himalaya, and so
made him hold a stick between his teeth, and then lifted him into the air; then he must have heard
some remark, and wanted to reply; and not being able to keep his mouth shut he must have let
himself go; and so he must have fallen from the sky and thus come by his death." So thought he; and
addressed the king: "O king, they that have too much tongue, that set no limit to their speaking,
ever come to such misfortune as this." And he uttered the following verses: The tortoise needs must
speak aloud, Although between his teeth A stick he bit; yet, spite of it He spoke -- and fell
beneath And now, O mighty master, mark it well. See thou speak wisely, see thou speak in season. To
death the tortoise fell; He talked too much. That was the reason. "He is speaking of me!" the king
thought to himself; and asked the Bodhisatta if it was so. "Be it you, O great king, or be it
another," replied he, "whosoever talks beyond measure comes by some misery of this kind." And so he
made the thing manifest. And thenceforward the king abstained from talking, and became a man of few
words.


8. The People Who Saw the Judas Tree:- Once on a time Bramadatta, the King of Benares, had four
sons. One day they sent for the charioteer and said to him, "We want to see a Judas tree [butea
frondosa]. Show us one!" "Very well, I will," the charioteer replied. But he did not show it to
them all together. He took the eldest at once to the forest in the chariot, and showed him the tree
at the time when the buds were just sprouting from the stem. To the second he showed it when the
leaves were green. To the third at the time of blossoming. And to the fourth when it was bearing
fruit. After this it happened that the four brothers were sitting together and someone asked, "What
sort of a tree is the Judas tree?" Then the first brother answered, "Like a burnt stump!" And the
second cried, "Like a banyan tree!" And the third, "Like a piece of meat!" And the fokuth said,
"Like the acacia!" They were vexed at each other's answers, and ran to find their father. "My
Lord," they asked, "what sort of a tree is the Judas tree?" "What did you say to that?" he asked.
They told him the manner of their answers. Said the king, "All four of you have seen the tree. Only
when the charioteer showed you the tree, you did not ask him, 'What is the tree like at such a
time, or at such another time?' You made no distinctions, and that is the reason of your mistake."
And he repeated the first stanza: All have seen the Judas tree. What is your perplexity? No one
asked the charioteer What its form the livelong year!"


9. The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts:- Once upon a time when Brahmadatta reigned in
Benares, the Bodhisatta [the future Buddha] came to life as a young lion. And when fully grown he
lived in a wood. At this time there was near the Western Ocean a grove of palms mixed with vilva
trees. A certain hare lived here beneath a palm sapling, at the foot of a vilva tree. One day this
hare, after feeding, came and lay down beneath the young palm tree. And the thought struck him, "If
this earth should be destroyed, what would become of me?" And at this very moment a ripe vilva
fruit fell on a palm leaf. At the sound of it, the hare thought, "This solid earth is collapsing,"
and starting up he fled, without so much as looking behind him. Another hare saw him scampering
off, as if frightened to death, and asked the cause of his panic flight. "Pray, don't ask me," he
said. The other hare cried, "Pray, sir, what is it?" and kept running after him. Then the hare
stopped a moment and without looking back said, "The earth here is breaking up." And at this the
second hare ran after the other. And so first one and then another hare caught sight of him
running, and joined in the chase till one hundred thousand hares all took to flight together. They
were seen by a deer, a boar, an elk, a buffalo, a wild ox, a rhinoceros, a tiger, a lion, and an
elephant. And when they asked what it meant and were told that the earth was breaking up, they too
took to flight. So by degrees this host of animals extended to the length of a full league. When
the Bodhisatta saw this headlong flight of the animals, and heard the cause of it was that the
earth was coming to an end, he thought, "The earth is nowhere coming to an end. Surely it must be
some sound which was misunderstood by them. And if I don't make a great effort, they will all
perish. I will save their lives." So with the speed of a lion he got before them to the foot of a
mountain, and lion-like roared three times. They were terribly frightened at the lion, and stopping
in their flight stood all huddled together. The lion went in amongst them and asked why there were
running away. "The earth is collapsing," they answered. "Who saw it collapsing?" he said. "The
elephants know all about it," they replied. He asked the elephants. "We don't know," they said,
"the lions know." But the lions said, "We don't know, the tigers know." The tigers said, "The
rhinoceroses know." The rhinoceroses said, "The wild oxen know." The wild oxen, "the buffaloes."
The buffaloes, "the elks." The elks, "the boars." The boars, "the deer." The deer said, "We don't
know; the hares know." When the hares were questioned, they pointed to one particular hare and
said, "This one told us." So the Bodhisatta asked, "Is it true, sir, that the earth is breaking
up?" "Yes, sir, I saw it," said the hare. "Where," he asked, "were you living, when you saw it?"
"Near the ocean, sir, in a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. For as I was lying beneath the
shade of a palm sapling at the foot of a vilva tree, methought, 'If this earth should break up,
where shall I go?' And at that very moment I heard the sound the breaking up of the earth, and I
fled." Thought the lion, "A ripe vilva fruit evidently must have fallen on a palm leaf and made a
'thud,' and this hare jumped to the conclusion that the earth was coming to an end, and ran away. I
will find out the exact truth about it." So he reassured the herd of animals, and said, "I will
take the hare and go and find out exactly whether the earth is coming to an end or not, in the
place pointed out by him. Until I return, do you stay here." Then placing the hare on his back, he
sprang forward with the speed of a lion, and putting the hare down in the palm grove, he said,
"Come, show us the place you meant." "I dare not, my lord," said the hare. "Come, don't be afraid,"
said the lion. The hare, not venturing to go near the vilva tree, stood afar off and cried,
"Yonder, sir, is the place of dreadful sound," and so saying, he repeated the first stanza: From
the spot where I did dwell Issued forth a fearful "thud"; What it was I could not tell, Nor what
caused it understood. After hearing what the hare said, the lion went to the foot of the vilva
tree, and saw the spot where the hare had been lying beneath the shade of the palm tree, and the
ripe vilva fruit that fell on the palm leaf, and having carefully ascertained that the earth had
not broken up, he placed the hare on his back and with the speed of a lion soon came again to the
herd of beasts. Then he told them the whole story, and said, "Don't be afraid." And having thus
reassured the herd of beasts, he let them go. Verily, if it had not been for the Bodhisatta at that
time, all the beasts would have rushed into the sea and perished. It was all owing to the
Bodhisatta that they escaped death. Alarmed at sound of fallen fruit A hare once ran away, The
other beasts all followed suit Moved by that hare's dismay. They hastened not to view the scene,
But lent a willing ear To idle gossip, and were clean Distraught with foolish fear. They who to
Wisdom's calm delight And Virtue's heights attain, Though ill example should invite, Such panic
fear disdain.


10. How a Vain Woman Was Reborn As a Dung-Worm:- Once upon a time, there was a king Assaka reigning
in Potali, which is a city of the kingdom of Kasi. His queen consort, named Ubbari, was very dear
to him; she was charming, and graceful, and beautiful passing the beauty of women, though not so
fair as a goddess. She died; and at her death the king was plunged in grief, and became sad and
miserable. He had the body laid in a coffin, and embalmed with oil and ointment, and laid beneath
the bed; and there he lay without food, weeping and wailing. In vain did his parents and kinsfolk,
friends and courtiers, priests and laymen, bid him not to grieve, since all things pass away; they
could not move him. As he lay in sorrow, seven days passed by. Now the Bodhisatta was at that time
an ascetic, who had gained the Five Supernatural Faculties and the Eight Attainments; he dwelt at
the foot of Himalaya. He was possessed of perfect supernatural insight, and as he looked round
India with his heavenly vision, he saw this king lamenting, and straightway resolved to help him.
By his miraculous power he rose in the air, and alighted in the king's park, and sat down on the
ceremonial stone, like a golden image. A young brahmin of the city of Potali entered the park, and
seeing the Bodhisatta, he greeted him and sat down. The Bodhisatta began to talk pleasantly with
him. "Is the king a just ruler?" he asked. "Yes, sir, the king is just," replied the youth; "but
his queen is just dead; he has laid her body in a coffin, and lies down lamenting her; and today is
the seventh day since he began. Why do you not free the king from this great grief? Virtuous beings
like you ought to overcome the king's sorrow." "I do not know the king, young man," said the
Bodhisatta; "but if he were to come and ask me, I would tell him the place where she has now come
into the flesh again, and make her speak herself." "Then, holy sir, stay here until I bring the
king to you," said the youth. The Bodhisatta agreed, and he hastened into the king's presence, and
told him about it. "You should visit this being with the divine insight!" he told the king. The
king was overjoyed at the thought of seeing Ubbari; and he entered his chariot and drove to the
place. Greeting the Bodhisatta, he sat down on one side, and asked, "Is it true, as I am told, that
you know where my queen has come into being again?" "Yes, I do, my lord king," replied he. Then the
king asked where it was. The Bodhisatta replied, "O king, she was intoxicated with her beauty, and
so fell into negligence and did not do fair and virtuous acts; so now she has become a little
dung-worm in this very park." "I don't believe it!" said the king. "Then I will show her to you,
and make her speak," answered the Bodhisatta. "Please make her speak!" said the king. The
Bodhisatta commanded: "Let the two that are busy rolling a lump of cow-dung, come forth before the
king!" and by his power he made them do it, and they came. The Bodhisatta pointed one out to the
king: "There is your queen Ubbari, O king! she has just come out of this lump, following her
husband the dung-worm. Look and see." "What! My queen Ubbari a dung-worm? I don't believe it!"
cried the king. "I will make her speak, O king!" "Pray make her speak, holy sir!" said he. The
Bodhisatta by his power gave her speech. "Ubbari!" said he. "What is it, holy sir?" she asked, in a
human voice. "What was your name in your former character?" the Bodhisatta asked her. "My name was
Ubbari, sir," she replied, "the consort of King Assaka." "Tell me," the Bodhisatta went on, "which
do you love best now -- king Assaka, or this dung-worm?" "O sir, that was my former birth," said
she. "Then I lived with him in this park, enjoying shape and sound, scent, savor and touch; but now
that my memory is confused by rebirth, what is he? Why, now I would kill king Assaka, and would
smear the feet of my husband the dung-worm with the blood flowing from his throat!" and in the
midst of the king's company, she uttered these verses in a human voice: Once with the great king
Assaka, who was my husband dear, Beloving and beloved, I walked about this garden here. But now new
sorrows and new joys have made the old ones flee, And dearer far than Assaka my worm is now to me.
When king Assaka heard this, he repented on the spot; and at once he caused the queen's body to be
removed, and washed his head. He saluted the Bodhisatta, and went back into the city, where he
married another queen, and ruled in righteousness. And the Bodhisatta, having instructed the king,
and set him free from sorrow, returned again to the Himalayas.


11. Sulasa and Sattuka:- Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there was a
beautiful woman of the town, called Sulasa, whose price was a thousand pieces a night. There was in
the same city a robber named Sattuka, as strong as an elephant, who used to enter rich men's houses
at night and plunder at will. One day he was captured. Sulasa was standing at her window when the
soldiers led Sattuka, his hands bound behind his back, down the street toward the place of
execution. She fell in love with him on sight, and said, "If I can free that stout fighting man, I
will give up this bad life of mine and live respectably with him." She sent a thousand pieces to
the chief constable, and thus gained his freedom. They lived together in delight and harmony for
some time, but after three or four months, the robber thought, "I shall never be able to stay in
this one place. But one can't go empty handed. Her ornaments are worth a hundred thousand pieces. I
will kill her and take them." So he said to her one day, "Dear, when I was being hauled along by
the king's men, I promised an offering to a tree deity on a mountain top, who is now threatening me
because I have not paid it. Let us make an offering." She consented to accompany her husband to the
mountain top to make the offering. She should, he said, to honor the deity, wear all of her
ornaments. When they arrived at the mountain top, he revealed his true purpose: "I have not come to
present the offering. I have come with the intention of killing you and going away with all your
ornaments. Take them all off and make a bundle of them in your outer garment." "Husband, why would
you kill me?" "For your money." "Husband, remember the good I have done you. When you were being
hauled along in chains, I paid a large sum and saved your life. Though I might get a thousand
pieces a day, I never look at another man. Such a benefactress I am to you. Do not kill me. I will
give you much money and be your slave." But instead of accepting her entreaties, he continued his
preparations to kill her. "At least let me salute you," she said. "I am going to make obeisance to
you on all four sides." Kneeling in front of him, she put her head to his foot, repeated the act at
his left side, then at his right side, then from behind. Once behind him, she took hold of him, and
with the strength of an elephant threw him over a cliff a hundred times as high as a man. He was
crushed to pieces and died on the spot. Seeing this deed, the deity who lived on the mountain top
spoke this stanza: Wisdom at times is not confined to men; A woman can show wisdom now and then. So
Sulasa killed the robber. When she descended from the mountain and returned to her attendants, they
asked where her husband was. "Don't ask me," she said, and mounting her chariot she went on to the
city.

