1. The Hermit And The Mouse A hermit took care of a temple in a small village. He took alms and
shared them with a few people who helped him clean the temple. There was a mouse in the temple that
kept stealing the hermit’s food and causing trouble for him. The hermit could not get rid of the
mouse no matter what he did. The mouse continued to steal food, even when it was kept in an earthen
pot hung from the roof. Distraught, the sage sought advice from a friend, who told him to find the
mouse’s food reserves and destroy them. After a thorough search of the premises, the sage found the
stockpile of the mouse and destroyed it. With its food gone, the mouse was unable to jump high up
to the roof for food. It became weak and got caught by the hermit, who threw it far away from the
temple. The mouse was hurt and never returned to the temple. Moral: Strike at the enemy’s source of
strength to defeat him.


2. The Foolish Weaver The Foolish Weaver Panchatantra story for kids A weaver and his wife lived in
a village. He went to the forest to get the wood that he needed to repair his loom. As he began to
chop the tree, a djinn appeared and asked him not to cut his abode. In return, the genie offered to
give anything that the weaver wanted. The weaver left the forest to discuss this with his wife. The
greedy and dimwitted wife told the weaver to ask the genie for an extra head and two extra hands so
he could think more and work more. The stupid weaver agreed and went back to the djinn, which
immediately granted the wish. The weaver happily walked back to the village, where people thought
him to be a monster and beat him to death. Moral: Lack of proper judgment can lead to several
missed opportunities.


3. Four Friends And A Hunter Four Friends And A Hunter Panchatantra story for kids A deer, a
turtle, a crow, and a rat were friends. They lived happily in a jungle. One day, the deer was
caught in a hunter’s trap and the friends made a plan to save him. The deer struggled as if it was
in pain and then it lay motionless, with eyes wide open, as if it were dead. The crow and the other
birds then sat on the deer and started poking it as they do to a dead animal. Right then, the
turtle crossed the hunter’s path to distract him. The hunter left the deer, assuming it dead, and
went after the turtle. Meanwhile, the rat chewed open the net to free the deer while the crow
picked up the turtle and quickly took it away from the hunter. Moral: Teamwork can achieve great
results. protip_icon Did you know? Panchatantra has over 200 translations and retellings in around
50 different languages across the globe. Stories From Mitrabedha (Losing Of Friends)


4. The Jackal And The Drum The Jackal And The Drum Panchatantra story for kids One day, a hungry
jackal wandered into a deserted battlefield in search of food. The place had nothing but a drum
that the army left behind. When the wind blew, the branches of a tree moved and hit the drum,
making a loud noise. The jackal was scared and decided to run from there. On second thoughts, he
decided to explore the noise. As he drew closer to the sound, he found the drum and realized that
it was harmless. When he approached the drum, he found food nearby. Moral: Do not react blindly
with fear.


5. The Crows And The Cobra The Crows And The Cobra Panchatantra story for kids Two crows, husband
and wife, and a cobra lived on a banyan tree in a forest near a small kingdom. The cobra was wicked
and ate the crows’ eggs when the crows left the nest in search of food. The crows went to a wise
jackal and asked for advice. As per the advice of the jackal, one of the crows went to the royal
palace and stole a very precious necklace belonging to the queen as the guards watched. The crow
flew slowly to its nest so that the guards could follow it. On reaching the banyan tree, the crow
dropped the necklace in the tree’s hollow cove, where the snake lived. On finding a cobra in the
hollow, the guards killed it and retrieved the necklace. The crows thanked the jackal and lived
happily. Moral: Even the most powerful enemies can be defeated with intelligence.


6. The Lion And The Camel The Lion And The Camel Panchatantra story for kids In a dense jungle, a
lion lived with its three assistants – a jackal, a crow, and a leopard. Due to their proximity to
the king of the jungle, the assistants never had to look for food. One day, they were surprised to
see a camel, which usually lived in the desert, wandering in the forest. On inquiry, they learned
that the camel lost its way. The lion gave it shelter and protected it. One day, the mighty lion
was injured in a battle with the elephants. Unable to hunt, the lion and the assistants were left
hungry. The three assistants suggested that they should eat the camel, but the lion refused to kill
it. The assistants hatched a plan to make the camel offer itself as food to its protector. The
crow, the leopard, and the jackal each offered themselves as food to the lion, which it refused.
Seeing this, the camel also did the same and was instantly killed by the lion. Moral: It is unwise
to trust cunning people who surround powerful or wealthy ones for their own benefit.


7. Right-Mind And Wrong-Mind Right Mind And Wrong Mind Panchatantra story for kids Two friends,
Dharmabuddhi (right, virtuous mind) and Papabuddhi (wrong, wicked mind) lived in a village.
Papabuddhi, who was wicked, decided to use the skills of the virtuous Dharmabuddhi to make money.
He convinced his friend to travel the world together and earn a lot of money. Once they earned
enough money, Papabuddhi convinced his friend that they should bury the money in a forest for
safety. He then stole all the money one night and went back to the village. When the friends went
back to the forest to get the money, Papabuddhi feigned ignorance, accused Dharmabuddhi of stealing
the money, and took the matter to the village elders, who agreed that they should ask the tree
spirit in the forest about Dharmabuddhi’s guilt. Papabuddhi asked his father to hide in the tree
bark and speak like the tree spirit to confirm the innocent man’s guilt. Sensing something wrong,
Dharmabuddhi set dry leaves and twigs on fire inside the hollow cove of the tree, forcing his
friend’s father out. Papabuddhi’s father confessed to his son’s misdeed and the village elders
punished him for it. Moral: Avoid association with the wicked or you may end up paying for their
misdeeds.


8. The Talkative Tortoise The Talkative Tortoise Panchatantra story for kids Once upon a time, a
tortoise named Kambugriva lived near a lake. It was friends with two swans that also lived in the
lake. One summer, the lake began to dry up, and there was little water for the animals. The swans
told the tortoise that there was another lake in another forest, where they should go to survive.
They came up with a plan to take the tortoise along. They made the tortoise bite the center of a
stick and told it not to open its mouth, no matter what. The swans then held each end of the stick
and flew, with the tortoise in between. People in the villages along the way saw a tortoise flying
and were awestruck. There was a commotion on the ground about two birds taking a tortoise with the
help of a stick. In spite of warnings from the swans, the tortoise opened its mouth and said,
“What’s that commotion all about?” And then, it fell to its death. Moral: One should speak only at
the right moment.


9. Goats And Jackal Goats And Jackal Panchatantra story for kids A jackal was once passing by a
village when it saw two strong goats fighting with each other. The goats were surrounded by people
who were cheering for them. A few minutes into the fight, the goats had bruises on their body and
were bleeding a little. This jackal was drawn to the smell of blood and wanted to get a bite of the
goat’s flesh. It jumped at the goats at once, without thinking. The two goats were stronger than
the jackal and mercilessly trampled on the animal and killed it. Moral: Think before you jump.


10. The Monkey And The Wedge The Monkey And The Wedge Panchatantra story for kids A team of
carpenters was working on building a temple near a banyan tree. The carpenters went on a lunch
break, leaving their tools and materials at the site. At this time, a group of monkeys came to the
site and started playing with the tools and the material. One monkey found a huge log of wood with
a wedge in it. A carpenter half-sawed a log and put a wedge to prevent the slit from closing. The
curious monkey settled inside the slit and tried to remove the wedge. After a lot of effort, it
succeeded in removing the wedge. The slit closed instantly, injuring the monkey gravely and
preventing it from moving from there. Moral: Interfering in other people’s business results in more
harm than good. protip_icon Trivia In Indian tradition, the Panchatantra is considered a
nītiśāstra. In Sanskrit, Nīti refers to ‘the wise conduct of life,’ and a śāstra is the written
records of technical or scientific knowledge. Hence, it is a work on human conduct and political
science.


11. The King And The Foolish Monkey The King And The Foolish Monkey Panchatantra story for kids
There was once a king who had a pet monkey. The monkey always accompanied the king and even did
little chores for him. One afternoon, as the king took a nap, the monkey sat next to the king and
fanned him. Meanwhile, a fly came and sat on the king’s nose. The monkey tried to shoo it away, but
it kept coming back. Frustrated with the fly, the monkey took the king’s dagger to kill it. He
attacked the fly as it sat on the king’s neck, killing the king instantly. Moral: A fool can never
assist you to glory.


12. The Bug And The Poor Flea The Bug And The Poor Flea Panchatantra story for kids A white flea
lived between the silky sheets of a king. It fed on the king’s blood without anyone noticing and
was very happy. One day, a bug came by and expressed its desire to taste the king’s blood. The flea
was uncomfortable with the idea as the bug’s sting can be painful and that could expose its
presence to the king. On the bug’s insistence, the flea agreed that it could taste the king’s blood
but had to wait until after he went to sleep. The bug agreed but couldn’t control itself. It bit
the king as soon as he sat on the bed. The king was furious and asked the guards to check his bed
for bugs. The bug quickly hid while the white flea got caught and killed. Moral: Do not trust the
words of strangers, for they could just be false promises.


13. The Crane And The Crab The Crane And The Crab Panchatantra story for kids An old and cunning
crab had difficulty catching fish. To avoid starvation, it came up with a plan to get food easily.
One day, it sat on the banks of the river with a sad face one day. On being asked, the crane said
that he foresaw that there would be a famine, and all the animals in the pond would die soon. The
naive fish believed the crane and sought its help. The crane happily agreed to carry the fish in
its mouth and leave them in another lake near the mountains. That way, the crane filled its
stomach. One day it decided to eat a crab and carried it on its back. The crab saw a lot of fish
skeletons on a barren land nearby and asked the crane about it. The crane confessed proudly that it
ate all the fish and now it would eat the crab. The crab acted quickly on hearing this and used its
claws to kill the crane and save its life. Moral: Do not believe hearsay; check the authenticity of
the information before acting. Stories From Aparïksitakárakam (Imprudence)


14. The Musical Donkey The Musical Donkey Panchatantra story for kids A washerman had a donkey
named Udhata. The donkey carried loads during the day and was set free to graze in the nearby
fields at night. He met a jackal one night and together, they would get food from nearby farms
while the farmers slept. While Udhata enjoyed vegetables, the jackal attacked the farmer’s poultry.
One night, Udhata was in a gay mood and told the jackal that he wanted to sing. The jackal warned
him that singing while stealing vegetables from a farm is not a good idea. The donkey ignored the
warning and sang to its heart’s content as the jackal ran to save its life. Soon, farmers woke up
hearing the donkey braying and beat it with sticks for eating the vegetables from their farms.
Moral: There is a right time and place to do anything.


15. The Bird With Two Heads The Bird With Two Heads Panchatantra story for kids There was once a
strange bird with two heads. Each head had a mind of its own. The bird had a very normal life, with
the heads cooperating with each other for the bird’s survival. One day, the heads started fighting
for a fruit they saw on a tree. There was only one fruit, and each head wanted the fruit for
itself. The second head suggested that they stop fighting and give the fruit to the wife instead.
Although the first head agreed, he was not happy and vowed to teach the first head a lesson. On
finding a poisonous fruit, the first head offered it to the second head, which consumed it happily.
Within minutes, the bird died leaving both minds useless. Moral: This story has two morals: Having
a conflicting state of mind is dangerous. And, every part of the body is important – the loss of
even one could be fatal.


16. The Mongoose And The Brahmin’s Wife The Mongoose And The Brahmins Wife Panchatantra story for
kids A Brahmin, his wife, and his baby boy lived in a small village. They had a pet mongoose that
lived with them. One day, when the brahmin was out on chores, his wife left the baby in the cradle
and went to fetch a pot of water. She asked the mongoose to take care of the baby while she was
away. As the mongoose guarded the baby, it saw a snake crawling into the house. It soon attacked
the snake and killed it. As soon as the Brahmin’s wife entered with the pot of water, the mongoose
happily welcomed her with blood all over her mouth. The lady was terrified at the sight and assumed
that the mongoose had killed the baby. Furious, the lady dropped the pot of water on the mongoose
and beat it to death with a stick. Then she went inside and found the baby happily playing in the
cradle. The lady realized what she had done and repented for acting without thought. Moral: Do not
act in haste without understanding the situation.


17. The Tale Of Two Fishes And A Frog The Tale Of Two Fishes And A Frog Panchatantra story for kids
In a lake, there lived many fishes and frogs. Two fishes, Sahasrabuddhi and Satabuddhi, were
friends with a frog called Ekabuddhi. They spent a lot of time together. One day, they overheard
two fishermen talking about how the lake was a good spot for fishing. The fishermen decide to come
back the next day to catch fish. Hearing this the frog decided to go away from the lake to save its
life. The fish, however, were arrogant and refused to leave, saying that they could fool the
fishermen with their swift movements and tricks. The frog left with its family and the next day,
both Sahasrabuddhi and Satabuddhi were caught by the fishermen. Moral: Don’t be overconfident in
the face of danger, think of safety first.


18. The Lion That Sprang To Life The Lion That Sprang To Life Panchatantra story for kids In a
village, there lived four friends who were all Brahmins. Of them, three were very gifted and had
successfully learned the holy scriptures while the fourth one was not. One day, the friends decided
to go to the king’s court and show their skills and impress him. Although reluctant, the three
Brahmins agreed to take their dimwitted friend with them. As they passed through a forest, they saw
the carcass of a lion. Boastful of their skills, the three learned Brahmin’s challenged one another
and decided to bring the lion back to life with each of their skills. The fourth friend pointed out
that it can be a dangerous idea. They brushed his opinion aside anyway. Scared of what was about to
happen, the fourth friend quickly climbed a tree. As soon as the lion sprang back to life, it
killed all three Brahmins and ate them. Moral: Common sense is always better than knowledge.


19. The Brahmin’s Dream The Brahmins Dream Panchatantra story for kids Once upon a time, there
lived a poor Brahmin without any friends or relatives. He was a miser and begged for alms for a
living. One day, he received a pot full of porridge from a generous person. He hung the earthen pot
from the wall and fell asleep staring at it. He drifted into a deep sleep and dreamt that there was
a famine and that he exchanged his pot of porridge for a hundred gold coins. He dreamt that he
bought a pair of goats and cows with the money, and made more money by trading milk. He also dreamt
that a rich merchant offered his daughter’s hand in marriage and that he had a kid. He was relaxing
at home when a group of kids would disturb him. Imagining that he was scaring them away with a
stick, he picks up the nearby stick in his sleep and starts waving it around. The Brahmin wakes up
suddenly, feeling the porridge on his hands and feet. He realizes that he has destroyed the only
food he had for the day and repents his actions. Moral: Do not build castles in the air. Stories
From Kákolùkïyam (Of Crows And Owls)


20. Elephants And Hares Elephants And Hares Panchatantra story for kids A herd of mighty elephants
lived in a dense forest. The elephant herd always occupied the little pond in the jungle, making it
impossible for the other animals to drink water. The king of the hares approached the elephant king
and presented the problem. The elephant dismissed him rudely. To teach the elephant a lesson, the
hare warns the elephant that the God of the lake, the Moon, is unhappy with the elephant’s
behavior. The elephant did not believe the hare’s words and asked to be taken to the Moon god. The
hare took the elephant to the lake on a full moon night and showed the reflection of the moon.
Seeing that, the elephant believed that the Moon god descended to the earth to punish them and
agreed to change his herd’s behavior. Moral: A little ingenuity can solve a seemingly big problem.


21. The Foolish Brahmin And The Crooks The Foolish Brahmin And The Crooks Panchatantra story for
kids A brahmin once performed sacred ceremonies for a rich merchant and got a goat in return. He
was on his way back carrying the goat on his shoulders when three crooks saw him and decided to
trick him into giving the goat to them. One after the other, the three crooks crossed the brahmin’s
path and asked him the same question – “O Brahmin, why do you carry a dog on your back?” The
foolish Brahmin thought that he must indeed be carrying a dog if three people had told him so.
Without even bothering to look at the animal, he let the goat go. Moral: If a lie is repeated
several times, it becomes the truth for a fool.


22. The Cave That Talked The Cave That Talked Panchatantra story for kids A hungry lion wandered
along the jungle it ruled in search of food. It was almost evening but the lion could not find a
single animal to prey upon. Dejected, it decided to go back home, when it found a cave. The lion
waited there for the resident animal to come back after sunset. He quickly went into the cave and
hid. The cave belonged to a jackal, which noticed the lion’s paw prints as it entered. He stepped
back immediately and wanted to know if the lion was really inside its cave. The jackal made a plan
to trick the lion. He started talking to the cave, asking if it was safe for it to enter. He kept
asking the same thing again and again and refused to enter the cave until he got a reply. The lion,
fearing that his prey would walk away, replied like the cave. As soon as the lion replied, the
jackal ran away from the cave never to come back. Moral: Presence of mind can save you from being
destroyed by foolish enemies.


23. Of Crows And Owls Of Crows And Owls Panchatantra story for kids The birds of the jungle
gathered for a meeting to discuss an important point. All birds, except the crows, showed up. The
birds wanted to choose a new king as their present king, Garuda, was too busy and did nothing to
protect them. After some thought, the birds agreed that the owl could see at night and should be
made the king. On the day of the coronation, a crow came and questioned the birds why they chose
the owl as their king. On hearing the argument, the crow pointed out the flaws in the owl and
suggested that Garuda should remain the king. The coronation was canceled and the owl, which was
disappointed, declared that owls and crows shall never be friends. The crow repented giving
unsolicited advice and flew away. Moral: Do not offer counsel unless asked for.


24. The Thief, The Brahmin, And The Demon A rich merchant was moved by the plight of a poor Brahmin
in his village and donated two calves to him. The Brahmin was thankful and took good care of the
calves, which soon became strong bullocks. The Brahmin plowed his land with the help of these
bullocks and earned a livelihood. In the same village were a thief and a demon who wanted the
bullocks for themselves. One night the thief and the demon came to the Brahmin’s house and got into
an argument about who should have the animals. Their quarrel woke the Brahmin, who started chanting
sacred mantras on seeing the demons. The demon ran away, and the thief was chased away by the
Brahmin. Moral: When two people fight, it is always the third person who benefits. Stories From
Labdhapranásam (Loss Of Gains)


25. The Story Of The Potter A poor potter lived in a small village. One day, he fell into a ditch
by accident and got hurt. The wound left a big scar on his forehead. The potter moved to another
village when his village was affected by famine. Luckily, he got work in the king’s court. The king
saw the scar on the potter’s face and assumed that he was a warrior. He treated the potter with
respect and made him a prominent member of his court. In the following months, the kingdom was
attacked by the enemies and the king asked the potter to lead the army. Afraid to do so, the potter
told the king the truth about himself and how he got the scar. The potter left the kingdom, leaving
the king embarrassed. Moral: Appearances can be deceptive or never judge a person by his or her
appearance.

