
1. The Complaints: At the railroad station lies a book of complaints in an accessible place. On its pages you can see faces, smudges, sarcastic remarks, a complaint about a hat that flew out of the car window, complaints about the conductor and the gendarme. Some just leave their autographs, sign, scribble, and smudge the sheets.
A gymnasium student several times tries to express his attitude to some outrageous event, but crosses out the unsuccessful, in his opinion, lines. Jocular remarks and responses are encountered. An unidentified dachshund is left unhappy with a review of the railroad superintendent's face. Someone informs the jealous gendarme about his wife's date with the barman Kostya and advises him not to get upset.
The deacon complains about the lack of lean food in the station buffet, and he is immediately offered whatever he can eat. The dismissed telegrapher declares everyone a fraud. Here is also a declaration of love to the unknown Katenka. The station master asks not to write extraneous things. The next inscription calls him a fool.

2. The Alchemist: Santiago is a young shepherd from Spain. One day in the old chapel, the hero has a dream that he will find treasure near the Egyptian pyramids. A gypsy woman and the old man Melchizedek meet in town and convince the boy to go to Egypt.
Santiago makes his way to Africa and meets an Englishman alchemist, who is on his way to the oasis of El Fayoum to meet the Great Alchemist. Together with the Englishman, the young man crosses the desert and finds himself in the oasis. Here Santiago falls in love with a local girl, Fatima.
One day Santiago has a dream that the oasis was attacked by enemies. Hearing of his vision, the natives prepare for battle, thanks to which the nomads are repulsed. Then the Great Alchemist appears and takes the young man as his apprentice. Together they proceed to the pyramids.
At the pyramids, the bandits attack Santiago, seizing all his possessions, and one of them jokingly relates his dream: there is a treasure buried beneath a tree in Spain by an old chapel. The young man returns home and finds the buried casket. Now he can return to Fatima.

3. To kill the mocking bird: Jean-Louise Fitch lives in a small house on Main Street in Maycomb. The heroine's father was a lawyer and worked as a trial lawyer. He also had his own law office. Several years ago the man had been widowed and was now raising 2 children alone. Jean-Louise, nicknamed Eyeball, had an older brother, Jim.
Next door to the Fitchas lived the Redley family, which was notable for being unsociable. The couple's bogeyman son, Radley, got mixed up with bad company, after which his father locked him up in the house. He was feared by all the children in town and shunned the neglected house.
The legend of the Scarecrow's cursed house appealed to the Eyeball's new neighbor, Dill, who came to visit his aunt for the summer. The heroes tried to lure Scarecrow out of the house, but they failed.
When Eyeball went to school in the fall, she had to walk past the cursed house every day. There were oak trees growing nearby, in which the girl began to find gifts: gum and pennies. The next summer, the boys tried to lure the Scarecrow out again.

4. Love in the time of cholera: Florentino and Fermina fall in love with each other. They begin dating in secret. In this, the young people are helped by Aunt Escolastica. The heroes write each other love messages.
Lorenzo, Fermina's father, becomes aware of his daughter's infatuation. He makes her refuse to see her lover. Fermina does not listen to her father. Then Lorenzo transports his daughter and his late wife's family to another place. This does not stop the young people, who continue to correspond.
Upon her return, Fermina realizes that their relationship is not real, as they hardly know each other. She breaks off her relationship with Florentino and gives up all of his letters. The young doctor Urbino begins to take care of the girl. Gradually, the heroine yields to her father and accepts a marriage proposal from a new suitor.
Soon Fermina gets married. Her husband is busy researching ways to fight cholera. Florentino continues to love Fermina. He realizes that she will not leave her wealthy husband. The hero has no choice but to wait for his rival to die.

5. The count of monte christo: In 1815, the ship Pharaoh, whose captain had died of fever on the high seas, returns from a voyage to Marseilles. The young sailor Edmond Dantes takes over command. According to the captain's last will, Dantes takes the ship to the island of Elba, where he hands over the package he received from him to Marshal Bertrand and meets the disgraced Emperor.
Dantes is given a letter to bring to Mr. Noirier, who lives in Paris. He is one of the conspirators who are preparing the return of Napoleon to the throne.
The owner of the «Pharaoh» wants Dantes to officially become captain. He is envied by the accountant of the ship's company. In order to dismiss Edmond he composes an anonymous letter and hands it to the assistant prosecutor.
The message informs him that Dantes is a secret agent of the Bonapartists. He is summoned for interrogation, where he recounts his visit to Elba. Dantes is sentenced to life imprisonment in the Château d'If, which is a political prison among the sea.

6. The grapes of wrath: Tom Joad receives an early release from prison and returns home. The state of Oklahoma is slammed by the Great Depression. The big Joad family is on the road prospectuses speak of a prosperous California. the
Millions of displaced people are moving along Route 66 southwest. Not all members of the Joad family reach the promised land. Grandfather and grandmother die and are buried by the side of the road. Tom meets preacher Jim Casey, shaken by social injustice.
But California is not going to accept them. Labor is plentiful, small farmers work the land themselves, and agribusinesses pay little. A family spends a day's wages, for one meal, but does not give up hope of a decent life.
The concerns drown the potatoes in the river and burn the crops, but do not give them to the starving. Protecting preacher Casey, Tom kills his attacker. He is wanted by the police. The family smuggles Tom out.
His sister gives birth to a stillborn baby. The family enters a barn where a man is starving to death. Tom's sister gives him a breast.

7. Slaughterhouse-Five: In the mid-1970s, writer Jonsen travels to Dresden and visits slaughterhouse number five, where prisoners of war were held. The author considers modern wars to be the child crusades of the 13th century, when thousands of children were tricked into slavery or killed. He writes a book about Billy Pilgrim.
The hero survives a plane crash and recounts the aliens who abducted him, the simultaneous existence of different time periods. The first time Billy emerges from time at the front in 1945. The aliens who abducted him do not attach importance to death and teach the earthling how to move through time moments. Pilgrim already knows when and how he will die. He has been to both his past and future lives.
A daughter takes her father home from the clinic. He sneaks away from his nurse. He manages to get on the radio, but is mistaken for a lunatic. Billy is back in ruined Dresden. American prisoners are sent to clean up the rubble and retrieve the bodies. Spring has come. The war is over.

8. The Brother's karamazov: There are three brothers in the Karamazov family: the older Dmitry, who hates his father, the middle Ivan, who ponders philosophical questions, and the young righteous Alyosha. Alexei tries to help the family cope with their passions.
Dmitri tells Alyosha how he is torn between two women Katerina Ivanovna and Grushenka. The first is a respectable girl and is considered to be Dmitri's bride. He took advantage of her money and is ashamed of it. But his real passion is for Grushenka, for whom their father, Fyodor Pavlovich, also has plans.
Ivan retells Alyosha his novel <<The Grand Inquisitor>> and discusses religious issues. Alyosha knows from his father that he is in love with Katerina.
Fyodor Pavlovich is killed by his pupil Smerdyakov. Dmitry is accused of murder and sentenced to hard labor. Ivan becomes insane. Smerdyakov commits suicide.

9. The Stand by Stephen King: A deadly strain of the flu virus breaks free from a secret U.S. laboratory. Everyone in the lab dies, only security guard Charles Campion manages to escape from the state. Soon Charles dies, but manages to infect the owner of the gas station. This is how the virus breaks out of the state and kills almost all of humanity.
The few survivors, learn to live in the new cruel world. People unite into two groups and establish a new social order. One group is called the Boulder Free Zone. Under the leadership of Abagail Fremantle, a 108-year-old black woman, the people build a free society based on humanism and equality.
A dark man who calls himself Randall Flagg also unites people around him. The people he gathers worship him as their messiah and gladly submit to his fascist dictatorship.
Flagg tries with all his might to destroy Boulder, but as a result he creates an energy ball that he cannot control and dies with his followers.

10. The Power and the Glory by Graham Green: The protagonist of the work is a Catholic clergyman who continues to travel through the backwoods of a Mexican state, sharing his faith with others. Local laws stipulate a firing squad as a punishment for <<crimes of this nature. At the same time, the priest, who was previously a virtuous and prosperous man, began to abuse alcoholic beverages as a result of the despair and loneliness that overwhelmed him.
The main character begins to pursue the punitive authorities. Saving his life, he goes to another state. On the territory of this administrative territorial unit, the only penalty for bringing religious doctrine to the masses is a fine, but not a firing squad.
A wealthy official helps the priest with a place to live and offers to serve without fear for his life in the nearby church, which does not have a rector. The protagonist refuses the offer. He is soon caught and then executed.

11. Madame Bovary by Gustave Flaubert: Charles Bovary, an austere provincial doctor, marries Emma. He worships his wife. She quickly becomes bored with marriage and life in the provinces.
One day she meets young Léon Dupuis and begins to dream about him, not knowing that the young man is also in love with her. When Leon goes away to study, Emma takes his departure hard.
She meets a landowner and becomes his mistress. Emma falls passionately in love with the man and buys expensive presents, borrowing them from a shopkeeper. The lovers plan to leave together, but the landowner leaves her.
Emma meets Leon again. They become lovers. Emma obsessively seeks his attention and once again embezzles money.
The shopkeeper demands payment of the debt. The lovers refuse to help Emma. She drinks the poison and dies.
The husband is heartbroken. He finds letters from his wife's lovers, but still loves Emma and forgives her. He dies shortly after his wife.

12. Perfume - The story of a murderer: Jean-Baptiste Grenouille was born under the counter of a smelly fish stall. Until the age of eight, the strange boy with an incredibly keen sense of smell lived in an orphanage. Then he was placed in the service of a tanner. Overcoming illness and resentment, Grenouille stubbornly clung to life. His only pleasure was the study of smells.
One day the young man sensed a new, previously unknown, alluring scent. It came from an unfamiliar girl. Jean strangled her to enjoy the scent.
Next, Grenouille killed purposefully composing a formula for
the perfume of love, using the natural body odors of young
beauties. The murderer was caught and led to the scaffold, but
the mystical perfume turned the execution into a mad orgy.
Avoiding punishment, Jean-Baptiste tried once again to demonstrate the power of his creation. He doused himself with perfume and was torn apart by vagrants, who went into ecstasy under the influence of the fragrance of love.
