
1. We see Rama take on a journey to achieve greatness with Viswamithra. His first test was to kill Thataka, the demoness, but he was hesitant because she was a woman. His next task to was protect the yanga by killing off demons attempting to disturb this holy event. We also learned that Vishnu, in a previous incarnation, tricks Mahabali in a form of a dwarf and claims the universe in 3 steps.

2. After Rama's initiation in the desert, he travels through Janaka and met eyes with Sita. They both became lovestruck, but Sita was so lovestruck that she could not eat, sleep, or concentrate. Rama completed the task of lifting, stringing and shooting the bow, and Sita was the prize. Rama may now marry Sita, and their wedding was HUGE!!

3. After the wedding, Dasaratha has decided to pass the throne to Rama. Everyone was very excited when they heard the news. However, Kooni (an evil hunchbacked dwarf woman) runs to Kaikeyi and began feeding her awful thoughts. Kooni finally convinced Kaikeyi to have Dasaratha fulfill his boons to her. One being that Rama is banished into exile for 14 years and the second one being that Bharatha is crowned king. Dasaratha was not pleased with her wish and fell numb. In the end, Rama did as he was told, said his goodbyes, and left with Lakshmana and Sita. Dasaratha disowned Kaikeyi and Bharatha a few moments before his death. Bharatha was furious when he heard that he could not light his father's funeral pyre and that Rama had been banished. He ruled for 14 years in place of Rama, and he left Rama's sandals on the throne to let everyone know that Rama is the real king.

4. At the very beginning of the journey, they met Jatayu that was an eagle who knew Dasaratha. After Lakshmana finished building their home, Soorpanaka approached Rama. The moment she laid her eyes on him, she went through the exact same feeling Sita did. She even asked Rama to marry her. Rama denied every single time, but she would not stop until he was hers. Lakshmana later cut off her nose, ears, and breasts. Soorpanaka went storming to her brother.

5. Soorpanaka went crying to her brother that Lakshmana had cut off her nose, ears, and breasts, because she was trying to snatch Sita for Ravana (LIAR). Soorpanaka exaggerated every detail about Sita's beauty to Ravana, and Ravana reacted the same way as Sita and Soorpanaka. Luckily, Soorpanaka came up with a devious plan to win Rama for herself. Ravana agreed with the plan and followed through. He asked his uncle, Mareecha, to take the shape of a golden deer. Sita noticed it and demanded Rama to catch it for her. Lakshmana, being the intelligent person ever, warned them that the golden deer is a trap, but they both did not listen. Rama chased after the deer and let out a shriek forcing Sita to force Lakshmana to check on Rama. Sita was home alone, which meant it was time for Ravana to pounce. He was disguised as a homeless old person. Ravana entered her home, dug the ground under her feet, lifted it off, placed it in the chariot, and left. Jatayu noticed that Sita was in danger and tried to kill Ravana, but Ravana ended up killing Jatayu.

6. In this chapter, Rama learned the story of Sugreeva and Vali. After hearing this story, Rama sided with Sugreeva and helped him defeat Vali. In the end, Vali reached enlightenment which made Sugreeva the new king.

7. Since Rama helped Sugreeva, Sugreeva asked Rama what he could do in return. Rama asked Sugreeva to send an army when the rainy season is over. After the rainy season ended, Lakshmana was sent to locate Sugreeva. He was very upset when he saw Sugreeva lost in his own drunkenness. Rama was quick to forgive Sugreeva.

8. Hanuman uses his size-changing powers to take a single step from India to the island of Sri Lanka, then shrinks back to a monkey. One the island, he was looking for Sita to deliver Rama's ring to her. He found her based on the descriptions he was given, and found the correct person. Hanuman gave Sita the ring, and Sita gave him a piece of jewelry to give to Rama. Ravana caught Hanuman and wanted to kill him, but Visbishana (Ravana's bro) reminded him it would be improper to kill a messenger. Hanuman left, and set fire to Ravana's capital and left.

9. Ravana asks his council whether or not he should fight Rama. Everyone agrees that he should kill Rama, and keep Sita as a prize. However, Visbishana disagreed. He reasoned that the future probably held worse things if they do not surrender Sita. Ravana does not listen, but Visbishana told him that his actions will lead to doom. His death was cursed to be in the hands of a monkey. Since Visbishana did not want to be seen on that side of war, he left and found Rama. Ravana prepared for war.

10. Visbishana goes and seeks protection from Rama (Vishnu). Rama asks his advisors what they think and they all agreed that he is a demon and traitor. However, Hanuman believes that Rama should provide protection because he uses his powers for the good of others. Even his house was orderly, not filled with temptations.

11. It is almost time for Ravana and Rama meet at the battlefield. Rama gave Ravana one last chance for forgiveness and peace. Ravana denies, and the fight begins. Ravana was left bare- handed on the field and Rama said he could return tomorrow with fresh weapons.

12. One by one, Ravana's team members are being killed. Ravana arrives with a chariot, and the gods intervened and gave a chariot to Rama. They began fighting, and their arrows met each others arrows. They began using supernatural weapons that were given to them by gods. The weapon that killed Ravana in the very end was called the Brahmasthra, created by Brahma. Finally, evil is gone.

13. Rama sent Hanuman to fetch Sita. Sita was overjoyed when she saw Rama, but Rama was not. He left her free to go wherever she wanted because it is not customary to admit a woman back home after residing all alone with a stranger. Sita lit a fire and jumped in. The fire transform to a god and safely returns Sita to Rama, having passed her test of virtue.

14. Rama and Sita are finally reunited. The gods allowed Dasartha to go down to earth to meet Rama. Rama was overjoyed to see his father again. Dasaratha asked Rama if he had any wish that could be fulfilled for him. Rama asked Dasaratha to find a place in his heart for Kaikeyi and Bharatha again. Dasaratha accepts the proposal, and Rama returns home - just in time too. The reunion was very happy, and the coronation began.

15. Rama was finally crowned king with Hanuman ready to spring into action at the slightest command. Hanuman, at this moment, realized that Rama is none other than Vishnu. Lakshmana - of course -stood by Rama devoted and watchful.