King Santanu married a strange woman he found by the river. They had many children and she drowned
all of them (I told you she was strange). The king stopped her from downing the last child (a boy).
She then said she was a goddess and that this child was a god but had to remain on earth as
punishment for stealing a sacred cow in a past life. The child was named Devavratha, but to confuse
you he is called Bhishma (one of firm vow). The goddess went back to wherever it is that goddesses
go, and the king continued ruling. One day he fell in love with a woman who ran a ferry; her name
was Satyavathi. King Santanu asked her father if he could marry her, and he said yes, but only if
Satyavathi’s children inherit, leaving poor Bhishma out in the cold. Bhishma was actually cool with
this and said he would remain celibate so that he never had children. Thus, King Santanu and ferry
woman Satyavathi married. They had two boys: one had no children and died in battle, and one
(Vichitravirya) grew to adulthood and married two women (Ambika and Ambalika). But before either of
his wives had children, Vichitravirya died and not long after that King Santanu also died. 


Thus, the only surviving member of the royal family was Bhishma who had taken a vow of celibacy and
refused to break it. What Queen Satyavathis had not told anyone that before she was married she had
actually been born from a fish and had had an encounter with a sage and given birth to a son named
Vyasa. So even though Vyasa isn’t exactly the heir, he can still kind of inherit. Everyone agreed
that Vyasa should sleep with Vichitravirya’s two wives and their children would inherit. Ambika
gave birth to a boy named Dhritarashtra. He was a nice enough guy and should have became king, but
he was born blind. Meanwhile, Vichitravirya’s other wife got with Vyasa and she gave birth to a boy
named Pandu. Dhritarashtra, being blind, realizes he can’t really rule, so he gives his kingdom to
his brother Pandu. Pandu is a pretty nice guy and loves to hunt. One day he is out hunting and he
kills a deer while it is in the middle of “love play.” Turns out this is no ordinary deer but a god
who curses Pandu and says essentially that since you interrupted me, I’m going to mess with you.


The curse states that if you have sex you’ll die. Pandu has no kids at this time, but he does have
two wives: Kunthi and Madri. He decides that he can’t rule, so he and his wives hang out in the
woods. One day Kunthi (Pandu’s wife #1) calls out for the sun god. He actually appears and she is
freaked out. He says, don’t call me unless you want me. He essentially ravishes her, though it’s
presented in the book as somewhat consensual. She gives birth to a boy names Karna but sends him
down the river in a basket. He is discovered and raised by a soldier and his wife. He comes back
later as a force to be reckoned with. Pandu thinks that maybe things will work for him if he plays
the system. He tells Kunthi to have relations with some other gods and have children. Kunthi gets
with Yama (god of death and justice) and she gives birth to Yudhistira. Then she gets with Vayu
(god of the wind) and has Bhimasena. Finally she does the deed with Indra (chief god) and gives
birth to Arjuna. Meanwhile, Pandu’s second wife, Madri, entices the gods Aswins and has twins Nakua
and Sahadeva. They are all boys, they are all awesome and they are collectively known as the
Pandavas. The epic focuses on these guys. Pandu just can’t resist his urges and tries to have sex
with his wife Madri. He dies in her arms and she flings herself on his funeral pyre. 


Kunthi (Pandu’s other wife) takes the boys to the blind brother of Pandu, Dhritarashtra, so they can be
raised to inherit the kingdom. Meanwhile, Dhritarashtra (Pandu’s blind brother) married the
princess Gandharai and becomes a blind king (not a desirable leader but a nice enough guy). She
blindfolds herself in sympathy of his blindness and never sees again. While Pandu was out in the
woods with his two wives avoiding sex, Dhritarashtra became king, and he and Gandharai had 100 sons
(I think they are all born from a metal ball that she harbors in her womb for years. When the ball
“drops” she wacks it with a stick and out pop the boys). These sons are not good boys and fight
with their cousins all the time. The oldest of these children is named Duryodhana and he’s a real
baddy. This collection of boys is called the Kauravas All 105 boys are looked after by Bhishma who
is constantly trying to train them and have them get along. The epic is essentially an ongoing feud
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. If you haven’t figured it out, the Pandavas are the good
guys. The evil brothers were envious of their cousin Yudhistira and started scheming to dethrone
him. Their first attempt to kill the Pandavas was by burning them inside a palace. The Pandavas
managed to escape, but then the evil brothers once again attempted to gain control. 


One challenged the eldest brother Yudhisthira to a game of dice which led Yudhisthira to lose everything,
including his and his brothers' wife, Draupadi. He, along with his brothers and their wife
Draupadi, were exiled from the kingdom. For twelve years they had to live in the forest and upon
the thirteenth year they were to hide in a city in disguise. It was during those thirteen years
that the brothers grew to learn what it was like to live with the bare minimum and became more
knowledgeable. After the thirteenth year Duryodhana decided that he would fight against them which
led to a huge war and the deaths of many. Many died from both sides and after the war, they
realized that nothing was really gained. The most dramatic figure of the entire Mahabharata,
however, was Krishna who was the supreme personality of Godhead himself, descended to earth in
human form to reestablish his devotees as care takers of the earth, and who practiced Dharma.


Krishna was the cousin of both parties, but he was a friend and advisor to the Pandavas, became the
brother-in-law of Arjuna, and served as Arjuna's mentor and charioteer in the Great War. Krishna is
portrayed several times as eager to see the war occur, and in many ways the Pandavas were his human
instruments for fulfilling that end. Throughout their lives and the terrible Great War, there were
examples of the ethical gaps between men which were never resolved. In the aftermath of the war,
Yudhishthira alone was terribly troubled, but his sense of the war's wrongfulness persisted to the
end of the text. This was in spite of the fact that everyone else, from his wife to Krishna, told
him the war was right; even the dying patriarch, Bhishma, lectured him at length on all aspects of
the Good Law (the Duties and Responsibilities of Kings). In the years that followed the Great War,
the only survivors on the part of the Kauravas, Duryodhana's parents, King Dhritarashtra and his
queen, Gandhari lived a life of asceticism in a forest retreat and died with yogic calm in a forest
fire. Kunti, the mother of the Pandavas was with them too. Krishna departed from this earth
thirty-six years after the Great War. When they learned of this, the Pandavas believed it was time
for them to leave this world too and they embarked upon the 'Great Journey,' which involved walking
north toward the polar mountain that is toward the heavenly worlds, until one's body dropped dead.


One by one, beginning with Draupadi, the Pandavas died along the way until Yudhishthira was left
alone with a dog that had accompanied him from the start. Yudhishthira made it to the gates of
heaven and there refused the order to drive the dog back, at which point the dog was revealed to be
an incarnate form of the God Dharma (the God who was Yudhishthira's actual, physical father), who
was there to test Yudhishthira's virtue. Once in heaven Yudhishthira faced one final test of his
virtue: He saw only the Dhartarashtra Clan in heaven, and he was told that his brothers were in
hell. He insisted on joining his brothers in hell, if that were the case! It was then revealed that
they were really in heaven, that this illusion had been one final test for him. In essence, the
epic story represents an extended exploration of the responsibilities set forth by the code of
dharma. In addition to recounting a heroic tale, the Mahabharata contains a collection of writings
on a broad spectrum of human learning, including ethics, law, philosophy, history, geography,
genealogy, and religion. It also features a number of legends, moral stories, and local tales all
woven into an elaborate narrative.