UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   1 
 Content  
Lasers : Characteristics of LASER, Interaction of radiation with matter, 
requisites of a Laser system. Construction and working of semiconductor 
laser. Application of Lasers in  Defence and Laser Printing.  
 
Optical Fibers: Propagation mechanism, Nume rical aperture derivation, 
Modes of propagation. Attenuation in fiber,  Discussion of block diagram of 
Point -to-Point communication, Optical fiber sensor. Numerical problems.  
 
Introduction:  
 
LASER is an acronym for  Light Amplification by Stimulated 
Emission  of Radiation. Laser device produces a beam of coherent, 
monochromatic, intense and directional light. Hence laser light is 
highly organized when compared with the ordinary light. This is 
because the waves of a laser beam move in phase with each other 
travel in a narrow path in one direction.  In the case of an ordinary 
light it spreads out, travels in different directions and hence it is 
incoherent. On account of the special properties, lasers are the most 
versatile and exploited tools in different fields such as Engineering, 
Medicine, Defence, Entertainment, Communication etc., Other  
common applications of laser include reading the bar code, cutting and 
welding metals, displays in light shows, playing music, printing 
documents, guiding  missile to its targ et and so on.  
 
Characteristics of Laser beam  
 Directionality:  The design of the resonant cavity, especially the 
orientation of the mirrors to the cavity axis ensures that laser 
output is limited to only a specific direction. Since laser emits 
photons in a particular direction, the divergence is less when 
compared the other ordinary sources.  
 
 Monochromacity:  The laser beam is characterized by a high 
degree of mono -chromaticity (single wavelength or frequency) 
than any other conventional monochromatic sources  of light. 
Ordinary light spreads over a wide range of frequencies, whereas 
laser contains only one frequency. The spectral bandwidth is UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   2 
 comparatively very less when compared to ordinary light. Hence 
the degree of mono chromaticity is very high in lasers.  
 
 Coherence : The degree of coherence of a laser beam is very high 
than the other sources. The light from laser source consists of 
wave trains that are in identical in phase. Laser radiation has high 
degree of special (with respect to Space) and temporal (wi th 
respective to time) coherence.  
 
 High Intensity : The laser beam is highly intense. Since wave 
trains are added in phase and hence amplitudes are added. Laser 
light emits as a narrow beam and its energy is concentrated in a 
small region. Since all the ene rgy is concentrated in the particular 
focus point, it is highly intense and bright. When laser beam is 
focused on a surface, the energy incident is of the order of 
millions of joules.  
 
 Focus ability : Since laser is highly monochromatic, it can be 
focused v ery well by a lens. It is so sharp the diameter of the spot 
will be close to the wavelength of the focused light. It can be 
focused to a very small area 0.7 m2. Since even laser is not 
ideally monochromatic the spot diameter in actual cases will be 
100 to 150 times larger than the wavelength.  
 
Basic principles:  Interaction of Radiation with Matter  
 
Production of laser light is a consequence of interaction of 
radiation with matter under appropriate conditions. The interaction of 
radiation with matter leads to transition of the quantum system such as 
an atom or a molecule of the matter from one quantum energy state to 
another quantum state.  
 
A material medium is composed of identical atoms or 
molecules each of which is characterized by a set of discrete allo wed 
energy levels.  An atom can move from one energy state to another 
when it receives or releases an amount of energy equal to the energy UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   3 
 difference between those two states, which is termed as a quantum 
jump or transition.   
 
Consider a two energy level system with energies E 1 and E 2 of 
an atom. E 1 is the energy of lower energy state and E 2 is the energy of 
excited state.  The energy levels E 1 and E 2 are identical to all the atoms 
in the medium.   The radiation (either absorbed or emitted) may be 
viewed a s a stream of photons of energy (E 2-E1)=hν, interacting with 
the material.  These interactions lead to any one of the following  
 
 Induced Absorption of radiation  
 Spontaneous emission of radiation  
 Stimulated emission of radiation  
 
Induced Absorption:  
Excitat ion of atoms by the absorption of photons is called induced 
absorption.  
 
 
 
An atom in the lower energy state E 1absorbs the incident photon of 
energy (E 1-E2) and goes to the excited state E 2.  This transition is 
known as absorption.  For each transition ma de by an atom one photon 
disappears from the incident beam.  
 
For an atom A , stimulated absorption transition can be expressed as  
                A   +    hν                          A*   (excited state)  
 
The number of absorption transitions per second per unit volume 
occurring in the material at any instant of time will be proportional to  
                           (i) The n umber of  atoms in the ground state N 1 
                          (ii) Energy density of the incident radiation (Uν)  
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   4 
 Rate of induced absorption  = B 12UνN 1 
 
Where  B12 is proportionality constant which gives the probability of 
absorptions and it is called Einstein co -efficient of absorption . Since 
the number of atoms in the lower energy state is greater, the material 
absorbs more number of the  incident photons.  
 
Spontaneous Emission:  
An atom which is at higher energy state E 2 is unstable, 
spontaneously returns to the l ower energy state E 1 on its own during 
which a single photon of energy (E 2-E1) = hυ is emitted, the process is 
known as spontaneous emission.  
 
Spontaneous transition can be expressed as  
                          A *                       A + hυ 
 
 
The number of spontaneous transitions per second, per unit volume 
depends on the num ber of atoms N 2 in the excited state.  
 
Therefore, the rate of spontaneous emission  = A 21N2 
 
Where A 21 is proportionality constant which gives the 
probability of spontaneous emission and it is called Einstein co -
efficient of spontaneous emission of radiatio n. 
 
The process has no control from outside.  The instant of 
transition, directions of emission of photons, phases of the photons and 
their polarization states are random quantities.  There will not be any 
correlation among the parameters of the innumerabl e photons emitted 
spontaneously by the assembly of atoms in the medium.  Therefore the 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   5 
 light generated by the source will be incoherent  (ex: light emitted from 
conventional sources).   
 
Stimulated Emission:   
   
Emission of photons by an atomic system with  an external 
influence is called stimulated emission.  A mechanism of forced 
emission was first predicted by Einstein in 1916 in which an atom in 
the excited state need not wait for the spontaneous emission to take 
place.  A photon of energy hυ = (E 2-E1), can induce the excited atom to 
make downward transition and emit light. Thus, the interaction of a 
photon with an excited atom triggers it to drop down to the ground 
state (lower energy) by emitting  a photon.   The process is known as 
induced or stimulated emission of radiation.  
 
Stimulated emission transition can be expressed as  
 A* +  hυ                   A + 2 hυ  
 
 
 
The number of stimulated transitions per sec per unit volume in the 
material is proportional to  
 (i) The number of atoms in the excited state N 2 
 (ii) Energy density of the incident radiation (Uν)  
 
Rate of stimulated emission= B 21UνN 2 
 
Where B 21 is proportionality constant which gives the 
probability of stimulated emissions and it is called Einstein co -efficient 
of induced (stimulated) emission.  
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   6 
 The process of stimulated emission has the following properties.  
 
I. The emitted photon is identical to the incident photon in all 
respects.  (It has the same frequency; it will be in phase an d will 
travel in the same direction and will be in the same state of 
polarization).  
II. The process can be controlled externally.  
III. Stimulated emission is responsible for laser.  
 
Some basic definitions  
1. Atomic system : 
      It is a system of atoms or molecules ha ving discrete energy levels.  
  
2. Active medium  
It is the medium  in which light ampli fication  takes place.  The 
medium may be solid, liquid or a gas.  Out of the different atoms 
in the medium a small fraction of atoms are responsible for 
stimulated emission and consequent light amplification . They are 
called active centres  
 
3. Energy density  
The energy density U ν refers to the tota l energy in the radiation 
field per unit volume per unit frequency due to photons. It is given 
by the Plank‟s distribution law  
𝑈𝜈=8𝜋ℎ𝜈3
𝑐3 1
𝑒ℎ𝜈
𝑘𝑇−1  
4. Population  
It is the number density (the number of atoms per unit volume) of 
atoms in a given energy state.  
 
5. Boltzmann factor  
It is t he ratio between the population  of atoms in the higher energy 
state to the lower energy state under thermal equilibrium. If N 2 is 
the number density of atoms in the energy state E 2 and N 1 is the 
numbe r density of atoms in the ground state then  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   7 
 According to Boltzmann condition N 1> N 2 and    N2
N1=e− hν
 kT 
6. Population inversion  
It is the condition such that the number of atoms in the higher 
energy (N 2) state is greater than the number of atoms in the 
ground state (N 1). i.e, N 2> N 1 
 
If N 2> N 1, it is non -equilibrium condition and it is called popula tion 
inversion.  
 
Expression for energy density of incident radiation in terms of 
Einstein coefficients:  
 
Consider an atomic system interacting with radiation field of 
energy density Uγ. Let E 1 and E 2, be the two energy states of atomic 
system (E 2> E 1). Let  us consider atoms are to be in thermal 
equilibrium with radiation field, which means that the energy density 
Uγ is constant in spite of the interaction that is taking place between 
itself and the incident radiation. This is possible only if the number of 
photons absorbed by the system per second is equal to the number of 
photons it emits per second by both the stimulated and spontaneous 
emission processes.  
 
We know that  
The rate of induced absorption  = B12UνN 1, 
The rate of spontaneous emission  = A 21N2 
The rate of stimulated emission  = B 21UνN 2 
 
N1 and N 2 are the number of atoms in the energy state E 1 and E 2 
respectively, B 12, A 21 and B 21 are the Einstein coefficients for induced 
absorption, spontaneous emission and stimulated emission 
respectively.  
 
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   8 
 At ther mal equilibrium,  
Rate of induced absorption = Rate of spontaneous emission + Rate 
of stimulated emission  
B12N1Uγ  = A 21N2  + B 21N2Uγ 
 
or         
           Uγ (B12N1  – B21N2)  = A 21N2 
2 21 1 122 21
NB NBNAU
 
By rearranging the above equation, we get  





11
2 211 12 2121
NBNB BAU
     ---------    (1) 
In a state of thermal equilibrium, the populations of energy levels E 2 
and E 1 are fixed by the Boltzmann factor.  The population ratio is 
given by,  
     
 2121()
2 1 1
1
2212
1
         EE
kT
EE h
kT kT
h
kTNeN
N N e N e
Since E E h
NeN

 
 

Equation (1) bec omes,  





1
2112 2121 1
kTh
eBB BAU
          ------  (2)  
According to Planck's law of black body radiation, the equation for U
  
is, 
Uν=8πhν3
c3 1
ehν
kT−1 ------- (3)    
 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   9 
 Now comparing the equation (2) and (3) term by term on the basis of 
positional identity we have  
 
33
21218
ch
BA
and 
1
2112BB                or      
21 12B B 
 
This implies that the probability of induced absorption is equal to the 
probability of stimulated emission. Due to this identity the subscripts 
could be dropped, and A 21 and B 21 can be simply represented as A and 
B and equation (3) can be rewritten.  
 

 At thermal equilibrium the equation for energy density is  
1] [e1
BAUγ
kThγ

 
 
(Think: Even though the probability of induced absorption is equal to 
the probability of stimulated emission, the rate of induced absorption is 
not equal to rate of stimul ated emission. Why?)  
 
Conditions for light amplification: - 
Conditions for laser emission can be studied by taking the ratios of rate 
of stimulated emission to spontaneous emission and rate of stimulated 
emission to absorption.  
At thermal equilibrium,  
 
21 2 21
21 2 21Rate of Stimulated Emission
Rate of SpontaneousEmissionB N U B U
A N A
 
 
Since, B 21/A21 = C3 /8πhν3 = constant,  
 
This suggests that in order to enhance the number of stimulated 
transitions the radiation density Uν should be made high.  
 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   10 
 
21 2 21 2
12 1 12 1Rate of StimulatedEmission
Rate of Induced absorptionB N U BN
B N U B N
 
(B21/B12 = 1) 
The stimulated emission will be larger than the absorption only when 
N2>N1.  If N 2>N 1 the stimulated emission dominates the absorption 
otherwise the medium will absorb the energy.  This condition of 
N2>N 1 is known as inverted population state or population inversion.  
 
Requisites of a laser system:  
The essential components of a  laser are  
 An active medium  to support population inversion.  
 Pumping mechanism  to excite the atoms to higher energy levels.  
 Population inversion  
 Metastable state  
 An optical cavity or optical resonator.  
 
Active medium:  
It is the material medium composed of atoms or ions or 
molecules in which the laser action is made to take place, which can be 
a solid or liquid or even a gas. In this, only a few atoms of the medium 
(of particular species) are responsible for stimulated emission.  They 
are called active cente rs and the remaining medium simply supports 
the active centers.   
 
Pumping Mechanism:  
To achieve the population inversion in the active medium, the 
atoms are to be raised to the excited state.  It requires energy to be 
supplied to the system.  The process of supplying energy to the 
medium with a view to transfer the atoms to higher energy state is 
called pumping.  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   11 
 Important   pumping mechanisms are  
a) Optical pumping : It employs  a suitable light source for excitation 
of desired atoms.  This method is adopted  in solid state lasers (ex: 
Ruby laser and Nd:YAG laser).  
b) Electric discharge : In this process an electric field causes 
ionization in the medium and raises it to the excited state. This 
technique is used in gas lasers (ex: Ar+ laser).  
c) Inelastic atom -atom collision  :In this method a combination of 
two types of gases are used, say A and B. During electric discharge A 
atoms get excited and they now collide with B atoms so that B goes to 
excited state. This technique is used in gas lasers (ex: He -Ne laser).  
d) Direct conversion  : In this process electrical energy is directly 
converted into light energy. This technique is used in semiconductor 
lasers (ex: GaAs laser).  
  
Population Inversion and Meta stable state:  
 
In order to increase stimulated emission it is es sential that 
N2>N 1 i.e., the number of atoms in the excited state must be greater 
than the number of atoms in the ground state. Even if the population is 
more in the excited state, there will be a competition between 
stimulated and spontaneous emission.  T he possibility of spontaneous 
emission can be reduced by using intermediate state where the life 
time of atom will be little longer (10-6 to 10-3s ) compared to excited 
state (10-9 s). This intermediate state is called metastable state  and it 
depends upon the nature of atomic species used in the active medium.  
 
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   12 
 Principle of pumping scheme:  
 
Consider three energy levels E 1, E2 and E 3 of a quantum system 
of which the level E 2 is metastable state. Let the atoms be excited from 
E1 to E 3 state by supply of appr opriate energy. Then the atom from the 
E3 state undergoes downward transition to either E 1or E 2 states rapidly. 
Once the atoms undergo downward transitions to level E 2 they tend to 
stay, for a long interval of time, because of which the population of E 2 
increases rapidly. Transition from E 2 to E 1 being very slow, in a short 
period of time the number of atoms in the level E 2 is far greater than 
the level E 1. Thus Population inversion has been achieved betweenE 1 
and E 2  . The transition from meta stable state  to ground state is the 
lasing transition. It occurs in between upper lasing E 2 and lower lasing 
level E 1. 
 
 
 
Optical resonator:  
 
 An optical resonator generally consists of two plane mirrors, with 
the active material placed in between them. One of the mir rors is 
semi -transparent while the other one is 100% reflecting. The 
mirrors are set normal to the axis of the active medium and parallel 
to each other.  
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   13 
  The optical resonant cavity provides the selectivity of photon states 
by confining the possible direc tion of photon propagation, as a 
result lasing action occurs in this direction.   
 
 The distance between the mirrors is an important parameter as it 
chooses the wavelength of the photons. Suppose a photon is 
travelling  between two reflectors, it undergoes re flection at the 
mirror kept at the other end .the reflected wave superposes on the 
incident wave and forms stationary wave such that the length L of 
the cavity is given by     𝐿=𝑛 λ
2        
Hence λ= 2L
𝑛 
Where,  L is t he distance between the mirrors,  λ is the wavelength of 
the photon, n is the integral multiple of half wavelength  
 
The wavelengths satisfying the above condition are only amplified. 
Hence the cavity is also called resonant cavity.  
 
The main Role of the optical resonator is to  
 Provide pos itive feedback of photons into the active medium to 
sustain stimulated emission and hence laser acts as a generator of 
light.  
 
 Select the direction of stimulated photons which are travelling 
parallel to the axis of optical resonator and normal to the plane  of 
mirrors are to be amplified. Hence laser light is highly directional.  
 
 Builds up the photon density (U ν) to a very high value through 
repeated reflections of photons by mirrors and confines them within 
the active medium.  
 
 Selects and amplifies only certain frequencies of stimulated photons 
which are to be highly monochromatic and gives out the laser light 
through the partial reflector after satisfying threshold condition.  
 
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   14 
 Semiconductor diode Laser  
A semiconductor diode laser is a specially fabricated p -n 
junction device that emits coherent light when it is forward biased.  The 
first semiconductor lasers wer e made by R.N. Hall and his co -workers 
in 1962 using gallium arsenide  (GaAs), which is a direct band gap 
semiconductor. Diode lasers are portable and used in optical 
communications, CD players, CD -ROM drives, optical reading, high 
speed laser printing etc.  
 
Principle:  The semiconductor laser is based on the principle of the 
emission of the recombination energy in the form of light. In normal 
state of a semiconductor the conduction band is sparsely occupied by 
electrons and valence band is occupied by large number of electrons 
and small number of holes.  The electron -hole recombination is the 
basic mechanism involved in the emission of light in semiconductor 
lasers.  They are made using direct band gap semiconductors such as 
GaAs, CdSe, GaAlAs  etc .By heavily doping the p -n junction and by 
applying a high current density, the stimulated emission of light is 
produced and hence the laser operation is made possible in the 
semiconductor laser.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Construction:  A schematic diagram of semiconductor laser is as  
shown in the diagram.  The semiconductor laser consists of heavily 
doped n - GaAs and p  - GaAs.  The diode chip is 500 𝜇𝑚 long and 
about 100 𝜇𝑚 wide and thick. The junction (active region) lies in a 
horizontal plane through the centre. The top and bottom faces are 
metallized and ohmic contacts are provided to pass the current through 
the diode.  The front and rear faces polished, parallel to each other and 
perpendicular to the plane of the junction. The polished faces 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   15 
 constitute the Fabry - perot resonator. The other two sides of the diode 
are roughened to prevent lasing action in that direction. The diode is 
forward biased,  with a voltage nearly equal to the bad gap voltage of 
the material.  
 
Working:   
 The energy band diagram of a heavily doped p -n junction is shown 
in figure (a). Due to heavy doping on the n -side, the donor levels are 
broadened and extend into the conduct ion band and the Fermi level 
EF is pushed in to the conduction band. The electrons occupy the 
portion of the conduction band below the Fermi level between EF 
and EC.  
 
 Similarly on the heavily doped p -side, Fermi level EF lies within the 
valence band. The  holes occupy the portion of the valence band above 
EF and EV. At the condition of thermal equilibrium Fermi level is 
uniform across the junction as shown in the figure  (a). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure (a) and (b): E nergy band diagram of a heavily doped p -n 
junction 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   16 
  When the junction is forward biased , electrons from the n region and 
holes from the p region are injected into the junction region. This is 
how pumping action takes place in a p -n junction semiconductor 
laser.  
 
 For small values of forward bias curre nt, the electron holes 
recombine and the recombination brings about spontaneous, non -
coherent emission of photons in all directions. At this stage the 
junction acts as a light emitting diode (LED).  
 
 As the forward bias current is increased the intensity of  light 
increases but when the forward bias reaches the threshold values  the 
carrier concentration in the junction region rises to a very  high value. 
In the junction region  attains a very high concentration of electrons 
in the conduction band and at the sam e time a very high 
concentration of holes in the valence band  as shown in figure (b) . 
 
 As a result the upper energy level in the narrow junction region has a 
high electron population whereas  the lower energy levels in this 
region are vacant, thereby giving  rise to the condition of population 
inversion. This narrow region in which population inversion takes 
place is known as ‘Inversion region’  or „Active region’ . 
 
 Initially, when a recombination of electron -hole pair takes place 
between the conduction and va lence band leads to spontaneous 
emission of photons.  The spontaneous photons moving in the 
junction plane stimulate the conduction electrons to jump to the 
vacant states of the valence band and produces coherent radiation 
giving rise to laser action. GaAs l aser emits at a wavelength of 
9000Ao in infrared region.  
 
 Semiconductor lasers are very compact, efficient and can be easily 
fabricated. But their spectral purity is low and emission pattern is 
broad. Hence, monochromatic property, coherence and directiona l UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   17 
 characteristic properties are not good as that of the other types of 
lasers.  
 
Characteristics  
TITLE  Description  
Type  Solid State Semiconductor laser.  
Active  Medium  The active medium of a semiconductor laser is a p -n junction.  
Pumping  Method  Direct con version method.  
Power  output  The power output from this laser is 1mW.  
Nature  of output  Continuous -wave or pulsed output.  
Wavelength  of output  8300 to 900 0Å. 
  
Advantages : 
1. It is very small  in dimension . The arrangement  is simple  and 
compact.  
2. It exhibi ts high efficiency.  
3. The laser  output  can be easily  increased  by controlling  the junction  
current . 
4. It is operated  with lesser  power  than ruby and CO 2 laser.  
5. It requires  very little auxiliary  equipment  
6. It can have  a continuous  wave  output  or pulsed  outpu t. 
 
Disadvantages:  
 1.  It is difficult  to control  the mode  pattern  and structure  of laser.  
 2. The output  is usually  from  5 to 15o i.e., laser  beam  has large      
divergence.  
 3. The purity and mono -chroma ticity are poorer  than other  types  of 
laser  
 4.  Threshold  current  density  is very large  (400A/mm2).  
 5.  It has poor coherence  and poor stability.  
  
 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   18 
 Application s: 
 1.     It is widely  used in fiber  optic  communication . 
 2.     It is used to heal the wounds  by infrared  radiation . 
 3.     It is used in laser printers  and CD writing  and reading.  
 
Application of Lasers in Defence:  
Lasers can concentrate extremely high powers in either pulses or 
continuous beams. Ma jor applications for these high  power levels are 
fusion research, nuclear weapons testing  and mis sile defence .  
 
High -energy lasers offer a way to deliver destructive energy to tar -
gets at the speed of light, which is very attractive for fast -moving 
targets such as nuclear missiles. In 1970, military laser range finders 
were developed to measure the d istance to battlefield targets 
accurately.  
 
 Laser range finder : 
 
The position of a distant object can be determined with the help of a 
range finder, in which a signal from a laser switches on a counting 
circuit and the signal returned from the target ter minates the count. The 
result is a digital count that can be calibrated directly in distance.  
 
Optical range finders not only afford accurate ranging, but also 
possible to determine the size and shape of the object and its 
orientation. The velocity of a mo ving object can be measured by 
comparing the frequency of the reflected signal with the emitted 
frequency.  
 
The frequency shift is given by the formula  
 
   
Where u is the radial velocity of the target and ν is the frequency of the 
signal.  
 
  
2u
cUNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   19 
 Measurement of  pollutant in atmosphere:  
 
Atmospheric optics uses lasers for the remote probing of the 
atmosphere, including the measurement of traces of pollutant gases, 
temperature, water vapour concentration.  
 
There are various types of pollutants in the atmosphere, t hey are oxides 
of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide etc.. In conventional 
technique the type and the concentration of pollutants in the 
atmosphere are determined by the chemical analysis. However this is 
not a real time data. This limitation can b e overcome by using laser 
which yields a real time data.  
 
In the measurement of pollutant, laser is made use of the way 
RADAR system is used. Hence it is often referred to as LIDAR which 
means Light Detection And Ranging . A LIDAR can be employed to 
measur e distance, altitude & angular coordinates of the object.  
In LIDAR  
 
 Ruby laser is used as transmitting source which sends the laser 
beam through the desired region of the atmosphere.  
 The transmitted light is reflected by the mirrors and reaches a 
receiver . 
 The receiving part consists of concave mirror collects scattered 
light. The mirror focuses the light on to a photo -detector which 
converts the light energy into electrical energy. A narrow band 
filter is used to cuts off extraneous light and background n oise. 
Then the electrical signal is fed to a computer a data processor, 
which gives information regarding distance, dimensions of the 
object etc.  
 
Two methods can be employed to know the composition of the 
pollutants  
(i) Absorption technique (ii) Raman back sc attering  
 
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   20 
 Absorption technique:  
     When laser beam is made to pass through the atmosphere then 
molecules can either absorb light of certain frequencies or scatter light 
of certain frequencies. Depending upon the characteristic absorption 
pattern, the co mposition of the pollutant molecules can be determined.  
 
Raman back scattering:  
     In this method laser light is passed through the sample, and the 
spectrum of the transmitted light is obtained. Since laser is highly 
monochromatic we expect to see only one line in the spectrum but due 
to Raman scattering, in the spectrum not one but several other lines of 
weak frequencies can be seen symmetrically. Additional spectral lines 
are called side bands and they are formed when the oscillating 
frequencies of the  molecules of the gas are added to or subtracted from 
the incident's light's frequency. Different gases produce different side 
bands, the shift in frequencies are termed as Raman shifts. Thus by 
observing Raman spectra of the back -scattered light in the ga s sample 
one can get the information about the composition of the pollutants.  
 
Laser Printing:  
From last few years, there has been tremendous increase in the 
use of computers as an aid to the management, processing and 
dissemination of information. The per ipheral device required by the 
computer for all these applications is the printer. Today, use of 
computers in large data processing installations places very high 
demand on printers as regards its speed, character flexibility, and print 
quality. The conven tional impact printers can no longer meet these 
demands because of their limited speed and character flexibility. In the 
new generation printers, printing method is based on the principle of 
electrophotography.  
 
A laser printer makes use of a beam of light  for printing. The  
light of the laser changes the electrical charg e on the drum, wherever it 
hits, as the p aper passes through the printer.  The laser beam strikes at 
the surface of the drum and this is known as a photo receptor. By 
changing the charge on t he drum, the laser beam can print patterns UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   21 
 onto the photo receptor. Once the design created on the drum, it coated 
with toner from a toner cartridge. In most of the cartridges, the toner is 
black, but the laser printers are also colo ured. 
 
Laser printers w ork by laying down an array of tiny, evenly 
spaced dots of “ink” on the paper. The dots are so small, and they 
blend so seamlessly that text looks very nearly as clean as what you 
get from a traditional typesetting machine. The quality you get from 
your la ser printer depends mostly on the resolution, the fineness of the 
dots it uses to print the images. Resolution measured  in dots per inch 
(dpi), which is how many dots it can write a long with a line, either 
vertically or horizontally. Most laser printers h ave had 300 dpi 
resolutions, but 600 dpi is just now becoming the new standard.  
  
OPTICAL  FIBRE S 
 
Optical fibre s are the light guides used in optical 
communications as wave -guides. They are thin, cylindrical, transparent 
flexible dielectric fibre s. They are  able to guide visible and infrared 
light over long distances. The working structure of optical fibre  
consists of three layers. Core - is the inner cylindrical layer which is 
made of glass or plastic.  Cladding - which envelops the inner core. It is 
made of t he same material of the core but of lesser refractive index 
than core. The core and the cladding layers are enclosed in a 
polyurethane jacket called sheath which safeguards the working 
structure of fibre  against chemical reactions, mechanical abrasion and 
crushing etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   22 
 Propagation mechanism in Optical fibre : 
In optical fibre s light waves can be guided through it, hence are 
called light guides. The cladding in an optical fibre  always has a lower 
refractive index (RI) than that of the core. The light  signal which 
enters into the core can strike the interface of the core and the cladding 
at angles greater than critical angle of incidence because of the ray 
geometry. The light signal undergoes multiple total internal reflections 
within the fibre  core. S ince each reflection is a total internal reflection, 
the signal sustains its strength and also confines itself completely 
within the core during propagation. Thus, the optical fibre  functions as 
a wave guide.  
 
Numerical Aperture and Ray Propagation in the Fibre : 
Consider an optical fibre  consists of core and cladding material 
placed in air medium. Let n 0, n1 and n 2 be the refractive indices of 
surrounding air medium, core and cladding material respectively. The 
RI of cladding is always lesser than that of c ore material (n 2< n 1) so 
that the light rays propagate through the fibre . Let us consider the 
special case of ray which suffers critical incident at the core cladding 
interface. The ray travels along AO entering into the core at an angle 
of 0 with respect  to the fibre  axis. Let it be refracted along OB at an 
angle 1 in the core and further proceed to fall at critical angle of 
incidence (= 90 -1) at B on the interface of core and cladding. Since it 
is critical angle of incidence, the refracted ray grazes a long core and 
cladding interface.  
 
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   23 
  It is clear from the figure that a ray that enters at an angle of 
incidence less than 0 at O, will have to be incident at an angle greater 
than the critical angle at the core -cladding interface, and gets total 
internal  reflection in the core material. When OA is rotated around the 
fibre  axis keeping 0 same, it describes a conical surface, those rays 
which are funneled into the fibre  within this cone will only be totally 
internally reflected and propagate through the fibre. The cone is called 
acceptance cone.  
 
The angle 0 is called the wave guide acceptance angle or the 
acceptance cone half -angle which is the maximum angle from the axis 
of optical fibre  at which light ray may enter the fibre  so that it will 
propagate in  core by total internal reflection.  
 
 Sin 0 is called the numerical aperture (N.A.)  of the fibre . It 
determines the light gathering ability of the fibre  and purely depends 
on the refractive indices of core, cladding and surrounding medium.  
 
 Let n 0, n 1 and n2 be the refractive indices of surrounding 
medium, core and cladding respectively for the given optical fibre . 
By applying the Snell‟s law at O,  
 𝑛0𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0=𝑛1𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃1 
 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0=𝑛1
𝑛0𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃1------------ (1) 
 
At the point B on the core and cladding interface, the angle of 
incidence = 90 -θ1 
Applying Snell‟s law at B  
 𝑛1sin 90−𝜃1 =    𝑛2𝑠𝑖𝑛90  
or 𝑛1𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃1=𝑛2 
 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃1=𝑛2
𝑛1------------------- (2) 
From equation (1)  
 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0=𝑛1
𝑛0𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃1=𝑛1
𝑛0( 1−𝑐𝑜𝑠2𝜃1) 
 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0=𝑛1
𝑛0 1−𝑛22
𝑛12= 𝑛1
𝑛0𝑥 𝑛12−𝑛22
𝑛12=  𝑛12−𝑛22
𝑛0 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   24 
 If the medium surrounding the fibre  is air, then n 0 = 1, 
Therefore,  𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0= 𝑛12−𝑛22 
  sinθ 0 = Numerical aperture: NA  
 
Therefore,  𝑁𝐴=𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0= 𝑛12−𝑛22 
 
If θi is the angle of incidence of an incident ray, then the ray will be 
able to propagate,  
  If   i<0  
 
or  if sin i< sin 0 
 
or  sin i< NA  
 
Fraction Index Change ( ): 
The fractional index change  is the ratio of the difference in the 
refractive indices between the core and the cladding to the refractive 
index of core of an optical fibre . It is also known as relative core cla d 
index difference, denoted by . 
If n 1 and n 2are the refractive indices of core and cladding, then,   
  = 
12 1 ) (
nnn  
 
Relation between NA and  
We have RI change  Δ=n1−n2
n1 
Or Δn1=(n1−n2)----------- (1) 
We know that,  
 

1 2 12 1 2 12
22
1
) () )( (..
nnnnnnnnn AN  
Since   n1~ n 2 , (n 1+ n 2) = 2n 1 
 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   25 
 Therefore,  

2 ..2 ..
12
1
nANn AN  
 
 We can see that, the value of NA can be increased by increasing  the 
value of ∆, so as to r eceive maximum light into the fibre. However, 
fibres with large ∆ will not be useful for optical communication due to 
the occurrence of a phenomenon inside the fibre called multipath 
dispersion or intermodal dispersion. This phenomenon introduces a 
time de lay factor, in the travel length and may cause distortion of the 
transmitted optical signal. This leads to pulse broadening, which in 
turn limits the communication distance.  
 
Modes of Propagation:  
The possible number of paths of light in an optical fibre  determines the 
number of modes available in it.  It also determines the number of 
independent paths for light that a fibre  can support for its propagation 
without interference and mixing.  
 
 We may have a single mode fibre  supporting only one signal at 
a time or multimode fibre  supporting many rays at a time.  
 
 Such number of modes supported for propagation in the fibre  is 
determined by a parameter called V -number. If the surrounding 
medium is air then the V - number is given by  
   𝑉=𝜋𝑑
𝜆 (𝑛12−𝑛22) 
or  
()dV NA

 
 
where d is the core diameter,  n 1 is the refractive index of core,  n 2 is 
the refractive index of the cladding and λ is the wavelength of the light 
propagating through the fibre . 
 𝑉=𝜋  2𝑟
𝜆 𝑛12−𝑛22=  𝑟 2𝜋
𝜆 𝑛12−𝑛22=𝑟.𝑘  𝑛12−𝑛22 .  
 
Where k is the propagation  constant (k= 2π/λ)  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   26 
 If fibre  is surrounded by a medium of refractive index n 0, then  
   
22
12
0) nndVn
  
For step index fibre , the number of modes ≈
2
2V
 
For graded index fibre , the number of modes ≈ V2/4 
 
Types of Optical fibre s: 
 
The optical fibre s are classified under 3 categories. They are  
 
a) Step index Single mode fibre  (SMF)  
b) Step index multi mode fibre (MMF)  
c) Graded index Mul ti Mode Fibre  (GRIN)  
 
This classification is done depending on the refractive index profile 
and the number of modes that the fibre  can guide.  
 
Refractive Index Profile (RI):  
Generally in any types of optical fibre , the refractive index of cladding 
material  is always constant and it has uniform value throughout the 
fibre . But in case of core material, the refractive index may either 
remain constant or subjected to variation in a particular way.  
 
 This variation of RI of core and cladding materials with resp ect 
to the radial distance from the axis of the fibre  is called refractive 
index profile. This can be represented as follows,  
 
 
 
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   27 
 Step index Single mode fibre  (SMF):  
 
A single mode fibre  has a core material of uniform refractive index 
(RI) value. Similarly  cladding also has a material of uniform RI but of 
lesser value. This results in a sudden increase in the value of RI from 
cladding to core. Thus its RI profile takes the shape of a step. The 
diameter value of the core is about 8 to 10 m and external diam eter of 
cladding is 60 to 70 m. Because of its narrow core, it can guide just a 
single mode as shown in Figure. Hence it is called single mode fibre . 
Single mode fibre s are most extensively used ones and they constitute 
80% of all the fibre s that are manu factured in the world today. They 
need lasers as the source of light. Though less expensive, it is very 
difficult to splice them (joining of optical fibre s). Since single mode is 
propagating through the fibre , intermodal dispersion is zero in this 
fibre . They find particular application in submarine cable system.  
 
 
 
  
 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   28 
 Step index multimode fibre  (MMF):  
 
The geometry of a step -index multimode fibre  is as shown in below 
figure. It‟s construction is similar to that of a single mode fibre  but for 
the difference t hat, its core has a much larger diameter by the virtue of 
which it will be able to support propagation of large number of modes 
as shown in the figure. Its refractive index profile is also similar to that 
of a single mode fibre  but with larger plane region s for the core.  
 
 The step -index multimode fibre  can accept either diode laser or 
LED (light emitting diode) as source of light. It is the least expensive 
of all. Since multi modes are propagating through this fibre  with 
different paths, intermodal dispers ion is maximum in this fibre . Its 
typical application is in data links which has lower bandwidth 
requirements.  
 
 
  
Input and output pulse  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   29 
 Graded index multimode fibre  (GRIN)  
 
The construction of Graded index fibre is similar to that of multimode 
step-index fibre, except for the refractive index of the core. The 
refractive index of the core varies across the core diameter (radially 
graded) as shown in figure, while the refractive index of the cladding 
is fixed. In this fibre, a number of modes can be transmitted. The rays 
move in a sinusoidal path through the core. Light travels at lower 
speed in the high -index region . Since the fastest components of the ray 
take the longer path and the slower components take the shorter path in 
the core, the travel time of the different modes will  be almost same. 
This reduces the effect of intermodal dispersion and hence losses are 
minimum with little pulse broadening. These fibres are most suitable 
for large bandwidth, medium distance and medium bit rate 
communication systems.  For such cables, ei ther a laser or LED source 
can be used to couple the signal into the core.  
 
  
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   30 
 Differences between single and multimode fibre s: 
Single mode fibre  Multi mode fibre 
 Only one mode can be 
propagated  
 Smaller core diameter  
 Low dispersion of signal  
 Can carry informa tion to longer 
distances  
 Launching of light and 
connecting two fibre s are 
difficult   Allows large number of modes 
for light to pass through it  
 Larger core diameter  
 More dispersion of signal  
 Information can be carried to 
shorter distances only  
 Launching of l ight and 
connecting of fibre s is easy  
 
Differences between step and graded index fibre s: 
Step index fibre  Graded index fibre 
 Refractive index of core is 
uniform  
 Propagation of light is in  the 
form of meridional rays  
 Step index fibre s has lower 
bandwidt h 
 Distortion is more (in 
multimode)  
 No. of modes for propagation  
Nstep = V2/2  Refractive index of core is not 
uniform  
 Propagation of light is in the form 
of skew rays  
 Graded index fibre s has higher 
bandwidth  
 Distortion is less  
 No. of modes for propagation  
Ngrad = V2/4 
 
Attenuation in optical fibre s: 
The total energy loss suffered by the signal due to the transmission of 
light in the fibre  is called attenuation.  
 
The important factors contributing to the attenuation in optical fibre  
are       i) Absorption l oss  ii) Scattering loss  iii) Bending loss  
iv) Intermodal dispersion loss and v) coupling loss.  
 
Attenuation is measured in terms of attenuation co -efficient and it is 
the loss per unit length. It is denoted by symbol . Mathematically 
attenuation of the fibre  is given by,  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   31 
  
LInPoutP
10log10
α




 dB/km  
Where P out and P in are the power output and power input respectively, 
and L is the length of the fibre  in km.  
Therefore, Loss in the optical fibre  = α x L  
 
1. Absorption loss:  
 
      There are two types of absorp tion;  
(a) Absorption by impurities.  
(b) Intrinsic absorption.  
 
 In the case absorption by impurities , the type of impurities is 
generally transition metal ions such as iron, chromium, cobalt and 
copper. During signal propagation when photons interact with these 
impurities, the electron absorbs the photons and get excited to higher 
energy level. Later these electrons give up their absorbed energy 
either as heat energy or light energy. The re -emission of light energy 
is of no use since it will usually be in a differ ent wavelength or at 
least in different phase with respect to the signal. The other impurity 
which would cause significant absorption loss is the OH- (Hydroxyl) 
ion, which enters into the fibre  constitution at the time of fibre 
fabrication.  In Intrinsic a bsorption  it is the absorption by the fibre  
itself, or it is the absorption that takes place in the material assuming 
that there are no impurities and the material is free of all in 
homogeneities and this sets the lowest limit on absorption for a given 
material.  
 
2. Scattering loss:  
 The signal power loss occurs due to the scattering of light 
energy due to the obstructions caused  by imperfections and defects, 
which are of molecular size, present in the body of the fibre  itself. The 
scattering of light by the ob structions is inversely proportional to the 
fourth power of the wavelength of the light transmitted through the UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   32 
 fibre . Such a scattering is called Rayleigh scattering. The loss due to 
the scattering can be minimized by using the optical source of large 
wavelength.  
 
 
3. Bending losses (radiation losses):  
There are two types of bending losses in optical fibre  a) macroscopic 
and b) microscopic bending loss.  
a) Macroscopic bends:  
Macroscopic bends occurs due the wrapping of fibre  on a spool or 
turning it around a corner. The loss will be negligible for small bends 
but increases rapidly until the bending reaches a certain critical radius 
of curvature. If the fibre  is too bent, then there is possibility of 
escaping the light ray through cladding material without unde rgoing 
any total internal reflection at core -cladding interface.  
 
b) Microscopic bends:  
This type of bends occurs due to repetitive small -scale fluctuations in 
the linearity of the fibre  axis. Due to non -uniformities in the 
manufacturing of the fibre  or by no n-uniform lateral pressures created 
during the cabling of the fibre . The microscopic bends cause irregular 
reflections at core -cladding interface and some of them reflects back or 
leak through the fibre . This loss could be minimized by extruding a 
compress ible sheath over the fibre  which can withstand the stresses 
while keeping the fibre  relatively straight.  
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   33 
 2 Coupling losses:  
Coupling losses occur when the ends of the fibre s are connected. At 
the junction of coupling, air film may exist or joint may be in clined or 
may be mismatched and they can be minimized by following the 
technique called splicing.  
 
Applications of Optical Fibre s: 
Point -to-point Communication  
The use of optical fibre s in the field of communication has 
revolutionized the modern world. An optical fibre  acts as the channel 
of communication (like electrical wires), but transmits the information 
in the form of optical waves. A simple p to p communication system 
using optical fibre s is illustrated in the figure.  
 
The main components of p to p c ommunication is  
1) An optical transmitter, i.e., the light source to transmit the 
signals/pulses  
2) The communication medium (channel) i.e., optical fibre  
3) An optical receiver, usually a photo cell or a light detector, to 
convert light pulses back into electrical  signal.  
 
 The information in the form of voice or video to be transmitted 
will be in an analog electric signal format. This analog signal at first 
converted into digital electric (binary) signals in the form of electrical 
pulses using a Coder or converter  and fed into the optical transmitter 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   34 
 which converts digital electric signals into optic signals. An optical 
fibre  can receive and transmit signals only in the form of optical 
pulses. The function of the light source is to work as an efficient 
transducer t o convert the input electrical signals into suitable light 
pulses. An LED or laser is used as the light source for this purpose. 
Laser is more efficient because of its monochromatic and coherent 
nature. Hence semiconductor lasers are used for their compact  size and 
higher efficiency.  
 
 The electrical signal is fed to the semiconductor laser system, 
and gets modulated to generate an equivalent digital sequence of 
pulses, which turn the laser on and off. This forms a series of optical 
pulses representing the i nput information, which is coupled into the 
optical fibre  cable at an incidence angle less than that of acceptance 
cone half angle of the fibre . 
 
Next the light pulses inside the fibre  undergo total internal 
reflection and reach the other end of the cable. Good quality optical  
fibre s with less attenuation to be chosen to receive good signals at the 
receiver end.  
 
The final step in the communication system is to receive the 
optical signals at the end of the optical fibre  and convert them into 
equivalent electr ical signals. Semiconductor photodiodes are used as 
optical receivers.  A typical optical receiver is made of a reverse biased 
junction, in which the received light pulses create electron -hole charge 
carriers. These carriers, in turn, create an electric fi eld and induce a 
photocurrent in the external circuit in the form of electrical digital 
pulses. These digital pulses are amplified and re -gain their original 
form using suitable amplifier and shaper. The electrical digital pulses 
are further decoded into a n analogues electrical signal and converted 
into the usable form like audio or video etc.,  
 
As the signal propagates through the fibre  it is subjected to two 
types of degradation. Namely attenuation and delay distortion.  
Attenuation is the reduction in the  strength of the signal because power UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   35 
 loss due to absorption and scattering of photons.  Delay distortion is 
the reduction in the quality of the signal because of the spreading of 
pulses with time. These effects cause continuous degradation of the 
signal a s the light propagates and may reach a limiting stage beyond 
which it may not be retrieve information from the light signal.  At this 
stage repeater is needed in the transmission path.   
 
 
 
 
 
An optical repeater consists of a receiver and a transmitter arr anged 
adjacently.  The receiver section converts the optical signal into 
corresponding electrical signal. Further the electrical signal is 
amplified and recast in the original form and it is sent into an optical 
transmitter section where the electrical sig nal is again converted back 
to optical signal and then fed into an optical fibre . 
 
   Finally at the receiving end the  optical signal from the fibre  is 
fed into a photo detector where the signal is converted to pulses of 
electric current which is then fed  to decoder which converts the 
sequence of binary data stream into an analog signal which will be the 
same information which was there at the transmitting end.  
 
 
Optical fiber  sensors and phase modulators : 
 
Optical fibers can be used as sensors. They are t ransducers, 
which generally consists of a light source coupled with an optical  
fibre and a light detector held at the receiver end. Optical fibre may be 
single mode or multimode. Fibre optic sensor can be used to measure 
physical parameters like pressure, temperature, strain, the acoustic 
field, magnetic field etc., by knowing variation in the intensity or 
phase modulation of an optic wave propagating through the fibre. The 
advantages of these sensors are that they are lighter, occupy lesser 
volume and are cheaper.  Reciever  Amplifier  Transmitter  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   36 
 1. Temperature Sensors  
There are two techniques to measure temperature using optic fibre. 
One is intensity modulated and the other one is the phase modulated 
sensor.  
 
   a) Intensity modulated sensor.  
Principle:  In this technique, temperature is measured by the 
modulation of intensity of the reflected light from a target. Silicon 
layer is used as target in this technique. The operation of the 
temperature sensor is based on the 1 micrometer wavelength light -
absorption characteristics of silicon as a function of temperature. The 
amount of light absorbed by the silicon layer (target) varies 
depending on the temperature. The change in the intensity of the 
reflected light (from target) is proportional to the change in 
temperature detected by photo detec tor. 
 
Construction: Schematic diagram of intensity modulated fibre optic 
temperature sensor is shown. The fibre is coated at one end with a 
thin silicon layer. The silicon layer is in turn coated with a reflective 
coating at the back. The silicon layer act s as the sensing element.  
 
 
Working:  The light from a laser source is launched into the fibre 
from one of the ends of one of its branches. It passes first through the 
fibre and then through the silicon layer. The mirror coating at the 
other end of the sil icon layer reflects the light back which again 
travels through the silicon layer. The reflected light emerges out 
through another branch of multimode fibre and is collected by a 
photo detector. The amount of light by the silicon layer varies with 
temperatu re and the variation modulates the intensity of the light 
received at the detector. Temperature measurements can be made 
with a sensitivity of 0.0010 C. 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   37 
 b) Phase modulated temperature sensor.  
Principle:  This sensor is based on phase variation resulting du e to 
the variation of refractive index of the optical fibre under the 
influence of temperature.  
 
Construction:  The construction of phase modulated temperature 
sensor is pictorially shown below. It can be used as pressure sensors 
also. 
 
 
The above diagram represents a single mode fibre sensor and the 
arrangement is known as the Mach -Zehnder arrangement. Laser light 
from a laser source is made to fall on a beam splitter which divides 
the light into two parts and sends light through the sensing fibre and 
the reference fibre. Light passing out of the two fibre elements is fed 
to a detector, which measures the difference in phase of the two light 
waves. Accurate measurements of the temperature may be obtained 
from these patterns.  
 
Working:   Light from the source  is divided into two parts by the 
beam splitter. One part is allowed through sensors fibre, and the other 
part is passed through the reference fibre. Light rays entering the 
fibres are coherent and have the same phase. Prior to heating or 
applying pressure , the optical path length of the two fibre ele ments is 
same and hence both the outputs will be in phase. When the sensor 
fibre is subjected to heating or under pressure, the temperature or 
pressure causes a change in the refractive index of the optical fibre. 
Therefore, the light coming out of the two  fibres at the other end will 
Reference Fibre  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   38 
 have phase difference due to difference in optical path difference 
caused by the heating or applying pressure. When the rays are 
superposed, they interfere and interference pattern will be observed. 
As temperature or pressure increases, the phase difference between 
the two outputs increases and is observed as a displacement of the 
fringe pattern. By determining the fringe displacement, we can 
determine the magnitude of temperature or pressure.  
 
Further reading: Displacement sens or, Force sensors and Liquid 
Level Detector.  
 
Advantages  over conventional communication:  
1) Large Bandwidth: Optical fibre s have a wider bandwidth (when 
compared to conventional copper cables). This helps in 
transmitting voice, video and data on a single lin e and at very fast 
rates (1014 bps as compared to about 104 bps in ordinary 
communication line)  
2) Electromagnetic Interference (EMI): EMI and disturbance in the 
transmission is a very common phenomenon in ordinary copper 
cables. However, the optical fibre  cables are free from EMI, since 
Electromagnetic radiation has no effect on the optical wave. 
Hence, there is no need to provide specially shielded conditions 
for the optical fibre . 
3) Low attenuation: Compared to metallic cables, optical fibre s have 
a low atten uation level (as they are relatively independent of 
frequency). The loss in optical fibre s is very low, of the order of 
0.1 to 0.5 dB/km of transmission.  
4) Electrical Hazards: Since, optical fibre s carry only the light 
signals, there are no problems of short -circuiting and shock 
hazards.  
5) Security:  Unlike electrical transmission lines, there is no signal 
radiation around the optical fibre , hence the transmission is secure. 
The tapping of the light waves, if done, leads to a loss of signal 
and can be easily det ected.  
6) Optical fibre  cables are small in size, light weight and have a long 
life. UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   39 
 Disadvantages : 
 Fibre  loss is more at the joints if the joints do not match (the 
joining of the two ends of the separate fibre s are called splicing)  
 Attenuation loss is large as the length of the fibre  increases.  
 Repeaters are required at regular interval of lengths to amplify the 
weak signal in long distance communication.  
 Sever bends will increase the loss of the fibre . Hence, the fibre  
should be laid straight as far as possi ble and avoid severe bends.  
 
Note:  
 Point to Point haul communication system is employed in 
telephone trunk lines. This system of communication covers the 
distances 10 km and more. Long -haul communication has been 
employed in telephone connection in the lar ge cities of New York 
and Los Angeles. The use of single mode optical fibre s has reduced 
the cost of installation of telephone lines and maintenance, and 
increased the data rate.  
 Local Area Network (LAN) Communication system uses optical 
fibre s to link the  computer -oriented communication within a range 
of 1 or 2 km.  
 Community Antenna Television (CATV) makes use of optical 
fibre s for distribution of signal to the local users by receiving a 
multichannel signal from a common antenna.  
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   40 
  
Sl.No Laser : short ans wer questions  CO‟s  
1.  Define the terms:  
a. Spontaneous emission.  
b. Stimulated Emission.  
c. Active medium.  
d. Population inversion.  1 
2.  Explain use of laser range finder in defence . 2 
3.  Give any two differences between the laser light and 
ordinary light.  2 
   
Sl.No Laser : Long  answer questions   
4.  Explain the requisites of a laser system.  2 
5.  With energy level diagram of semiconductor diode 
laser, explain the working of diode laser.  3 
6.  Discuss the conditions required for laser action.  2 
7.  Write a note on measurement of pollutants in 
atmosphere using laser.  2 
8.  Explain the three processes which take place when 
radiation interacts with matter.  2 
9.  Explain the terms stimulated emission and population 
inversion. Obtain an expression for        energy density 
of photons in  terms of Einstein‟s co -efficient.  2&3 
10.  Explain the characteristics of a laser beam.   
11.  Explain the working principle of a semiconductor laser 
using band diagram and discuss its advantages.   
 
SI. 
No Optical Fiber – short answer q uestions  CO 
1 Give reas on  
 Optical fibre s are immune to electromagnetic 
interference.                                
 Intermodal dispersion is minimum in GRIN 
compared to MMSI fibre .  
 Repeaters are used in the path of optical fibre s in 
point to point communication system.  1 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   41 
 2  Explain the terms  
a. Acceptance angle  
b. Cone of acceptance  
c. Numerical aperture  
d. Modes of propagation  
e. Attenuation.  1 
3 Explain attenuation losses in optical fibre s. 2 
4 Write any two advantages of optical fibre 
communication over normal communication.  2 
5 Explai n propagation mechanism in optical fibre s. 2 
6 Distinguish between step and graded index fibre s. 2 
S. No  Optical Fiber : Long answer q uestions  CO’s  
1 With the help of ray diagram, explain the working 
principle of optical fibre s. 1&2 
2 Derive an express ion for acceptance angle of an optical 
fibre  in terms of refractive indices.  1&2 
3 What is numerical aperture? Obtain an expression for 
numerical aperture in terms of refractiv e indices of core 
and cladding and  arrive at the condition for 
propagation.       
4 Explain the terms 1) modes of propagation and 2) types 
of optical fibre s 1 
5 What is attenuation? Explain the different losses in 
optical fibre s. 2 
6 With the help of a block diagram explain point to point 
communication.  2 
7 Discuss the advantag es and disadvantages of an optical 
communication system.  1 
 
  UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   42 
 Sample Problems : 
1. Calculate the ratio of  
i) Einstein Coefficients,  ii) Stimulated to spontaneous emissions, 
for a system at 300K in which radiations of wavelength 1.39 µm 
are emitted.  
15
3 33
2121102.68 8 xh
ch
BA

 
Since B 12 = B 21 we can write 
15
2121102.6 xBA  
We have    
Rate of stimulated emission/Rate of spontaneous emission  
=
UAB
NAUNB
2121
2 212 12  
But  
3
21
3218 1 1
11hh
kT kTA hUB c
ee    
      
      
  
Therefore rate of stimulated emission/rate of spontaneous emission  
=




11
2121
2121
kTh
eBAxAB

        =   




11
kTh
e =10-15 
 
2. Calculate on the basis of Einstein‟s theory, the number of photons 
emitted per second by a He -Ne laser source emitting light of 
wavelength 6328Ao with an optical power of 10mW.  
tnhc
tEn
tEP
 
Hence   
hcP
tn  
                = 3.182x1016 UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   43 
 3. Calculate the numerical aperture, relative RI difference, V - number 
and number of modes in an optical fibre of core diameter 50 µm.  
Core and cladding Refractive indices 1.41 and 1.40 at λ= 820nm.  
(NA)2 = (n 12- n22)              NA = 0.1676                
12
10.007nn
n   
 ) (2
22
1n n dV
         
    =32 
Hence no of modes=  V2/2       =  512.  
 
4. An optical fibre has cla d of RI 1.50 and NA 0.39.   Find the RI of 
core and the acceptance angle.  
(NA)2 = n 12- n22  θo= sin-1 0.39 
(0.39)2= n 12 - (1.50)2                  = 22.96o 
n1 =  1.54   
 
5. The NA of an OF is 0.2 when surrounded by air. Determine the RI 
of its core.  Given The  RI of cladding as 1.59.  Also find the 
acceptance angle when it is in a medium of RI 1.33.  
(NA)2 = (n 12 – n22)        θ o = 8.64o 
             n1= 1.60  
 
6. A glass clad fibre is made with core glass of RI 1.5 and cladding is 
doped to give a fractional index d ifference of 0.0005.  Determine  
a) The cladding index.  
b) The critical internal reflection angle.  
c) The external critical acceptance angle  
d) The numerical aperture  
 
7. The attenuation of light in an optical fibre is estimated at 
2.2dB/km.  What fractional initial inten sity remains after 2km & 
6km? L = 2 : P out/Pin = 36.3%    |     L=6 : P out/Pin  = 4.79%  
 
UNIT 3 LASERS AND OPTICAL FIBER                                                                                             
CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS                                                        
Electrical& Electronics Engineering Stream - (EC, EE, EI and ET)  
R V College of Engineering   44 
 8. Find the attenuation in an optical fibre of length 500m , when a 
light signal of power 100mW emerges out of the fibre with a 
power 90mW.  
 α = 
LPp
inout) ( log1010    = 0.915dB/km  
 
9. A semiconductor laser emits green light of 551 nm. Find out the 
value of its band gap.  Eg = hc/𝜆  = 2.25 eV  
 
10. The probability of spontane ous transition is given as 0.08  in a 
laser action which  results with the ra diation of 632.8 nm 
wavelength. Calculate the probability of stimulated  emission.  
(Ans. 1.22x1013) 
11. Calculate the critical angle if the refractive indices of optical 
fibre  are 1.5 & 1.48.  (Ans. θ c = 80.63o) 
 
12. The optical fibre  power after propagating through  a fibre  of 1.5 
km length is reduced to 25% of its original value. Compute the 
fibre  loss in dB/km.  (Ans. 4 dB/km)  
 
13. The ratio of population of two energy levels out of which one 
corresponds to metastable state is 1.059x10-30. Find the 
wavelength of light e mitted at 330K.  
 
30
1210 059.1 xNN
,   T=330K,     λ=?  
Constants       h=6.63x10-34Js,           K= 1.38x10-23J/K,       
C= 3x108m/s 
Using the relation for Boltzmann‟s factor  
kThcekTheNN

12
 
λ = 632.8nm.  